## Chapter I

### I

All afternoon the wind sifted out of the black Welsh glens, crying notice that Winter had come sliding down over the world from the Pole. Riverward, there was the faint moaning of new ice. It was a sad day, a day of gray unrest and discontent. The shifting air seemed to mourn the loss of some bright thing with a soft, tender elegy. In the pastures, great work horses nervously stamped their feet. All through the countryside, small brown birds flew twittering in cliques of four or five, darting from tree to tree, calling in recruits for their southing. A few goats clambered to the tops of high, lone rocks, staring longingly upward with yellow eyes as they sniffed the heavens.

The afternoon passed slowly, a solemn procession toward evening. On its heels, an excited wind rushed out, rustled the dry grasses, and fled whimpering across the fields. Night drew down like a black cowl, and Holy Winter sent his nuncio to Wales.

Beside the high-road—which lined the valley, ran up through a cleft in the hills, and out into the world—stood an ancient farmhouse of heavy stone and thatch. The Morgan who built it had played against Time and nearly won.

Inside, a fire burned on the hearth. An iron kettle hung over the blaze, and a black iron oven hid in the coals scattered at the flame's edge. The brisk firelight glinted on the tips of long-handled pikes racked upon the walls—weapons unused in the hundred years since a Morgan had clamored in Glendower’s ranks, trembling with rage at the flinty lines of Iolo Goch.

In a corner stood a great chest, its wide brass bindings catching the light in a resplendent glow. Within it lay papers, parchments, and stiff untanned skins, inscribed in English, Latin, and the old Cymric tongue: Morgan was born, Morgan was married, Morgan became a knight, Morgan was hanged. Here lay the history of the house, shameful and glorious. But the family was small now, unlikely to add any records to the chest beyond the simple chronicle: Morgan was born—and died.

There was Old Robert, for instance, sitting in his high-backed chair, smiling into the fire. His smile was one of perplexity and a strange, passive defiance. It was as if he sought to make the Fate responsible for his being a little ashamed of itself simply by smiling at it. Often he wearily considered his existence, ringed with petty defeats that mocked him the way street children torment a cripple. It was strange to Old Robert that he—who knew so much more than his neighbors, who had pondered so endlessly—should not even be a capable farmer. Sometimes he imagined he understood too many things to ever do any one thing well.

And so Old Robert sipped the burned ale of his own experimenting and smiled into the flames. He knew his wife would be whispering excuses for him, and that the laborers in the fields removed their hats to the name of Morgan, not to Robert himself.

Even his aged mother, Gwenliana—shivering beside the fire as though the wind's very sound called the cold into her bones—was not judged so incompetent. In the cottages, there was a little fear of her, and great respect. Any day she sat in the garden holding her necromantic court, you might see some farm lad blushing, hugging his hat to his chest as he listened to Gwenliana’s magic. For many years she had practiced the second sight and taken pride in it. Though her family knew her prophecies were mere guesses, their shrewdness dulling with age, they listened with simulated awe and asked her for the location of lost things. When, after one of her mystic recitations, the scissors were not found under the second board of the shed floor, they pretended to find them there anyway. Had she lost her robe of augury, there would have remained only a little wrinkled old woman, soon to die.

This pantomime of awe was a harsh tax on the convictions of Mother Morgan. It outraged her nature; she had apparently come into the world to be a scourge upon all foolishness. Matters with no obvious connection to either the church or the price of goods were, to her, plain nonsense.

Old Robert had loved his wife so well and so long that he could think sharp things about her without injuring his affection. When she came home that afternoon, raging over the price of a pair of shoes she hadn’t wanted anyway, he had mused: *Her life is like a book crowded with mighty events. Every day she rises to the peak of some tremendous climax having to do with buttons or a neighbor’s wedding. I think that when true tragedy comes upon her, she will not be able to see it over her range of anthills. Perhaps this is luck,* he thought, and then: *I wonder, now, how she would compare the king’s own death with the loss of one of the sow’s red pigs.*

Mother Morgan was too busy with the day itself to bother with the foolishness of abstractions. Someone in the family had to be practical, or the thatch would blow away—and what could you expect from a pack of dreamers like Robert, Gwenliana, and her son, Henry? She loved her husband with a queer mixture of pity and contempt, born equally of his failings and his goodness.

She worshiped young Henry, though of course she could not trust him to have the least idea of what was conducive to his health or benefit. In turn, the family loved Mother Morgan, feared her, and constantly got in her way.

She had fed them and trimmed the lamp. Breakfast was already laid by the fire. Now she searched about for something to mend, as though she did not mend every tear the moment it appeared. In the midst of her search for busyness, she paused and glanced sharply at young Henry. It was the kind of harsh, affectionate look that said, *I wonder, now, if he isn't in the way of catching cold down there on the floor.* Henry squirmed, wondering what chores he had neglected that afternoon. But immediately she caught up a cloth and went to dusting, and the boy was reassured.

He lay propped on one elbow, staring past the fire into his own thoughts. The long gray afternoon, bleeding into this mysterious night, had called up strong yearnings in him, the seeds of which had been planted months before. It was a desire for a thing he could not name. Perhaps he was moved by the same force that gathered the birds into exploring parties and made the animals nervously sniff upwind for the scent of winter.

Young Henry was conscious, this night, that he had lived for fifteen tedious years without accomplishing a single thing of importance. Had his mother known his feelings, she would have said, “He is growing.”

His father would have echoed, “Yes, the boy is growing.” But neither would have understood what the other meant.

In his face, Henry drew from his parents almost equally. His cheekbones were high and hard, his chin firm, his upper lip short and thin like his mother’s. But there, too, was the sensual underlip, the fine nose, and the eyes that looked out on dreams; these were Old Robert’s features, as was the thick, wiry hair coiled like black springs against his head. Yet, where there was complete indecision in Robert’s face, there was a great quantity of decision in Henry’s—if only he could find something to decide upon. Here were three before the fire—Robert, Gwenliana, and young Henry—whose eyes looked beyond the walls and saw unbodied things, peering into the night for ghosts.

It was a preternatural night, a time when you might meet corpse-candles gliding along the road, or come upon the ghost of a Roman legion marching at the double-quick to reach the sheltering city of Caerleon before the full storm broke. The little misshapen beings of the hills would be searching out deserted badger holes to hide themselves from the dark, the wind crying after them through the fields.

Inside, the house was quiet but for the snapping of the fire and the swishing of the blown thatch. A log cracked on the hearth, and out of the crevice a thin blaze leaped up, curling about the black kettle like a flower of flame. Mother Morgan flurried to the fireplace.

“Robert, you will never be paying attention to the fire. You should be poking at it now and again.”

Such was her method: she poked a large fire to make it smaller, and when it died, she stirred the embers violently to restore the flame.

A faint sound of footsteps came along the high-road—a sound that might have been the wind, or those walking things which cannot be seen. The steps grew louder, then stopped in front of the door, followed by a timid knocking.

“Come!” Robert called. 

The door opened softly. There, silhouetted against the black night, stood a bent, feeble man with eyes like weak flames. He paused on the threshold as though undecided, but in a moment advanced into the room, asking in a strange, creaking voice:

“Will you be knowing me, I wonder, Robert Morgan? Will you be knowing me that have been gone so long?” His words were a plea.

Robert searched the shrunken face.

“Know you?” he said. “I do not think—wait! Can it be Dafydd? Our little farm lad Dafydd, who went away to sea years past?”

A look of complete relief washed over the wayfarer's face. It was as though he had been applying some delicate, fearful test to Robert Morgan. He chuckled.

“It’s Dafydd, sure. And rich—and cold.” He finished with a wistfulness that struck like a recurring pain.

Dafydd was gray-white and toughened like dry hide. The skin of his face was stiff and thick; he seemed to change expression only with slow, conscious effort.

“I’m cold, Robert,” his queer, dry voice went on. “I can’t seem ever to get warm again. But anyway, I’m rich”—as though he hoped the two might balance—“rich, along with him they call Pierre le Grand.”

Young Henry had risen. “Where have you been to, man—where?” he cried.

“Where? Why, I’ve been out to the Indies, that’s where. To Goaves and to Tortuga—that’s the turtle—and to Jamaica, and the thick woods of Hispaniola for the hunting of cattle. I’ve been all there.”

“You’ll be sitting down, Dafydd,” Mother Morgan interrupted. She spoke as though he had never been away. “I’ll see about getting you something warm to drink. Will you look at how Henry gobbles you up with his eyes, Dafydd? Like as not, he’ll be wanting to go to the Indies, too.” To her, the very idea was a pleasant idiocy.

Dafydd kept silent, though he appeared to be straining against a desperate desire to talk. Mother Morgan frightened him just as she had when he was a towheaded farm boy. Old Robert recognized his embarrassment, and Mother Morgan seemed to sense it too; after pressing a steaming cup into his hands, she left the room.

Wrinkled old Gwenliana remained in her seat before the fire, her mind lost in the swimming future. Her clouded eyes were veiled with tomorrow. Behind their vague blue surfaces, the mounting events and circumstances of the world seemed to crowd together. She was gone from the room—slipped into pure Time, and that the future.

Old Robert watched the door close behind his wife, then settled himself with the slow turnings of an old hound.

“Now, Dafydd,” he said, peering into the fire with a smile, while Henry, kneeling on the floor, gazed with awe at this mortal who held the very distances of the world in his palm.

“Well, Robert—it’s about the green jungle I wanted to tell you, and the brown Indians that live in it, and about him they call Pierre le Grand. But, Robert, there’s something gone out of me, like a little winking light. I used to lie on the decks of ships at night and think and think of how I’d talk and boast when finally I came home again—but it’s more like a child I am, come home to cry. Can you understand that, Robert? Can you understand that at all?” He leaned forward eagerly.

“I’ll tell you. We took the tall plate ship they call a galleon, and us with only pistols and the long knives they use for cutting trails in the jungle. Twenty-four of us there were—only twenty-four, and ragged—but, Robert, we did horrid things with those same long knives. It’s no good for a man that was a farm lad to be doing such things, and then having to think about them. There was a fine captain—we hung him up by his thumbs before we killed him. I don’t know why we did it. I helped, and I still don’t know why. Some said he was a damned Papist, but then, so was Pierre le Grand, I think.

“Some we pushed into the sea, their breastplates shining and shimmering as they went down—grand Spanish soldiers, with bubbles coming out of their mouths. You can see deep into the water there.” Dafydd ceased and stared at the floor.

“You see, I don’t want to be hurting you with these things, Robert, but it’s like something alive is hidden in my chest under my ribs, biting and scratching to get out of me. I’m rich from the venturing, sure, but most times that doesn’t seem enough. I’m richer, maybe, than your own brother, Sir Edward.”

Robert smiled with tightened lips. Now and then his eyes wandered to the boy kneeling on the hearth. Henry was taut with attention, gluttonously feeding on the man's words. When Robert spoke, he avoided Dafydd’s eyes.

“Your soul’s burdening you,” he said. “You’d best have a talk with the Curate in the morning—though about what, I don’t know.”

“No, no. It’s not my soul at all,” Dafydd went on quickly. “A man's soul leaks out of him the very first thing in the Indies, leaving him with a dry, shrunken feeling where it used to be. It’s not my soul; it’s the poison that’s in me, in my blood and in my brain. Robert, it’s shriveling me like an old orange. The crawling things there, and the little flying beasts that come to your fire at night, and the great pale flowers—all poisonous. They do horrible things to a man. My blood feels like cold needles sliding in my veins right this moment, even with this fine fire before me. All this—all of it—is because of the dank breathing of the jungle. You cannot sleep in it, nor lie in it, nor live in it at all, without it breathing on you and withering you.

“And the brown Indians—why, look!” He rolled back his sleeve. Robert, in disgust, motioned him to cover the sick, white horror festering on his arm.

“It was only a little scratch from an arrow—you could hardly see it—but it’ll be killing me before long, I guess. There are other things in me, Robert. Even the humans are poisonous, and there's a song the sailors sing about that.”

Young Henry started up excitedly.

“But the Indians!” he cried. “Those Indians and their arrows. Tell me about them! Do they fight much? How do they look?”

“Fight?” said Dafydd. “Yes, they fight always; they fight for the love of it. When they aren't fighting the men of Spain, they’re killing amongst themselves. Lithe as snakes they are, quick and quiet, and brown as ferrets—the very devil for getting out of sight before a man can get a shot at them.

“But they’re a brave, strong people, with fear in them for only two things: dogs and slavery.” Dafydd was entirely immersed in his tale now. “Why, boy, can you think what they do to a man who gets himself taken in a skirmish? They stick him full of long jungle thorns from head to toe, and on the thick end of every thorn is a ball of fluff, like wool. Then the poor captive stands in a circle of naked savages while they set light to the fluff. And any Indian who doesn't sing while he burns there like a torch is cursed and called a coward. Now, can you imagine any white man doing that?

“But dogs they fear, because the Spaniards hunt them with huge mastiffs when they’re gathering slaves for the mines. And slavery is horrible to them. To go chained body-to-body into the wet earth, year upon the crown of year, until they die of the damp ague—they would much rather be singing under the burning thorns, dying in a flame.”

He paused, stretching his thin hands into the fireplace until they were nearly touching the blaze. The light that had come into his eyes as he talked died out again.

“Oh, I’m tired, Robert—so very tired,” he sighed. “But there’s one thing I want to tell you before I sleep. Maybe the telling will ease me. Maybe I can speak it out and then forget about it, just for one night. I must go back to the damned place. I can never stay away from the jungle anymore, because its hot breath is on me. Here, where I was born, I shiver and freeze. A month would find me dead. This valley, where I played and grew and worked, has cast me out for a foul, hot thing. It cleanses itself of me with the cold.

“So, will you be giving me a place to sleep, with thick covers to keep my poor blood moving? In the morning, I’ll be off again.” He stopped, his face flexing with pain. “I used to love the winter so.”

Old Robert helped him from the room with a hand under his arm, then returned to sit again by the fire. He looked at the boy lying unmoving on the floor.

“What are you thinking about now, son?” he asked very softly, after a time.

Henry drew his gaze back from the lands beyond the blaze.

“I’m thinking I’ll be wanting to go soon, Father.”

“I know, Henry. The whole of this long year I’ve seen it growing in you like a strong tree—London, or Guinea, or Jamaica. It comes of being fifteen and strong, with the passion for new things upon you. Once, I saw the valley grow smaller and smaller, too, until finally it smothered me a little, I think. But aren’t you afraid of the knives, son? And the poisons, and the Indians? Do these things not put fear in you?”

“No-o-o,” Henry said slowly.

“Of course not—and how could they? The words have no meaning to you at all. But the sadness of Dafydd, the hurt of him, and his poor, sick body—aren’t you afraid of those? Do you want to go about the world weighed down with such a heart?”

Young Henry considered this for a long time.

“I would not be like that,” he said at last. “I would be coming back very often, for my blood’s sake.”

His father went on smiling valiantly.

“When will you be off, Henry? It will be lonely here without you.”

“Why, I’ll go now, as soon as I may,” said Henry. In that moment, it seemed that he was the elder, and Robert the little boy.

“Henry, will you do two things for me before you go? Will you think tonight of the long sleeplessness I’ll endure because of you, and of how lost my days will be? And will you remember the hours your mother will fret about your underclothing and the state of your religion? That’s the first thing, Henry. The second is this: will you go up to old Merlin on the crag-top tomorrow, tell him of your going, and listen to his words? He is wiser than you or I may ever be. There is a kind of magic he practices which may be of help to you. Will you do these two things, son?”

Henry had become very sad.

“I would like to stay, my father, but you know—”

“Yes, boy.” Robert nodded. “It is my sorrow that I *do* know. I cannot be angry, nor can I forbid your going, because I understand. I wish I might prevent it—wish I could whip you, thinking that I helped you. But go to bed, Henry. Think and think on it when the light is out and the dark is all around you.”

Old Robert sat dreaming in his chair long after the boy had gone.

*Why do men like me want sons?* he wondered. *It must be because they hope, in their poor beaten souls, that these new men of their blood will do the things they were not strong enough, nor wise enough, nor brave enough to do. It is rather like another chance at life—like a new bag of coins at a table of luck after your fortune is gone. Perhaps the boy is doing what I might have done, had I been brave enough years past. Yes, the valley has smothered me, I think, and I am glad this boy of mine finds it in his power to vault the mountains and stride about the world. But it will be—so very lonely here without him.*

### II

Old Robert came in from his rose garden late the next morning and stood in the room where his wife was sweeping. She eyed the good soil on his hands with disapproval.

“He’ll be wanting to go now, Mother,” Robert said nervously.

“Who will be wanting to go, and where?” She was brusque and busy with her sweeping; the quick, inquisitive broom hounded dust from the corners and floor cracks and drove it in little puffs out the door.

“Why, Henry. He’ll be wanting to go to the Indies now.”

She stopped her work to stare at him. “The Indies! But, Robert! Oh, nonsense!” she scoffed, and the broom swung more rapidly in her hands.

“I’ve seen it for long and long, growing in him,” Robert went on. “Then Dafydd came with his tales. Henry told me last night that he must go.”

“He’s only a little boy,” Mother Morgan snapped. “He can’t be going to the Indies.”

“When Dafydd set out, a short while ago, there was a longing in the child’s eyes that will never be satisfied, not even if he reaches the Indies. Haven’t you noticed, Mother, how his eyes look away beyond the mountains at something he wants?”

“But he may not go! He may not!”

“Ah, there is no use in it, Mother. A great gulf lies between my son and me, but none at all between me and my son. If I did not know the lean hunger of him so well I might forbid his venturing, and he would run away with anger in his heart, for he cannot understand the hunger that’s in me for his staying. It would come to the same thing, anyway.” Robert spoke with gathering conviction.

“There’s a cruel difference between my son and me. I’ve seen it in the years of his growing. For whereas he runs about sticking his finger into pot after pot of cold porridge, grandly confident that each one will prove the pottage of his dreaming, I may not open any kettle, for I believe all porridge to be cold. And so—I imagine great dishes of purple porridge, drenched with dragon’s milk, sugared with a sweetness that can only be envisioned. He tests his dreams, Mother, and I—God help me!—am afraid to.”

She was growing impatient with his talk.

“Robert,” she cried almost angrily, “whenever there’s a boding on us, or need, or sorrow, you hide in words. Here is your duty! This boy is too young. There are horrible places across the sea, and winter is closing in. He would be sure to catch his death from a winter cough. You know how the dampness on his feet makes him sick. He must not leave this farm—not even to go to London, I say—even if these eyes you talk about starve in his head.

“How could you possibly know what kind of people he would be taking up with, filling his head with nonsense and wickedness? I know the evil that’s in the world. Doesn’t the Curate mention it nearly every Sabbath? ‘Pitfalls and snares,’ he calls them, do you see? And so they are, too. And here you stand, content to talk foolishness about purple porridge when you should be doing something useful. You must forbid it.”

Robert answered her impatiently.

“To you he is only a little boy who must be made to say his prayers of nights and to wear a coat into the fields. You have not felt the polished steel of him as I have. Yes, to you that quick, hard set of his chin is only the passing stubbornness of a headstrong child. But I do know; and I say to you, without pleasure, that this son of ours will be a great man, because—well—because he is not very intelligent. He can see only one desire at a time. I said he tested his dreams; he will murder every dream with the implacable arrows of his will. This boy will reach every goal of his aiming, for he can realize no thought, no reason, but his own. And I am sorry for his coming greatness because of a thing Merlin once said. You must look at the granite jaws of him, Mother, and the trick he has of clenching his teeth until the cheek muscles stand out.”

“He must not go,” she said firmly, pinching her lips tightly together.

“You see, Mother,” Robert went on, “you are something like Henry yourself, for you never admit the existence of any idea save your own. But I will not forbid his going, because I must not have him stealing out into the lonely dark with bread and cheese under his coat and a hurt feeling of injustice in his heart. I permit him to go. More than that, I will help him go if he wishes it. And then, if I have misjudged my son, he will come sneaking back with the fearful hope that no one will mention his cowardice.”

Mother Morgan said, “Nonsense!” and went back to her work. She would dissolve this thing by disbelieving it. Oh, the thousand things she chained to Limbo with her incredulity! For many years she had beaten Robert’s wild thoughts with a heavy phalanx of common sense; her troops simply charged in and overwhelmed him. Always he retired wearily and sat smiling for a time. He was sure to come back to sanity in this case as in others.

—

Robert was working the soil about the roots of a rose bush with his strong brown hands. His fingers lifted the black loam and then patted it gently back into place. Now and again he stroked the gray trunk of the bush with a touch of great love. It was as though he were smoothing the covers over someone about to sleep, touching an arm to be reassured of their safety.

The day was light, for winter had inched back a bit and returned its hostage to the world—a small, cold sun. Young Henry came and stood near an elm by the wall, a tree bedraggled and leafless and gaunt from nursing the winds.

“You have been thinking as I asked you?” Robert spoke quietly.

Henry started. He did not know that the man, kneeling as though in adoration of the earth, had noticed him; and yet he had come here to be noticed.

“Yes, father,” he said. “How could I help thinking?”

“And has it bound you here? Will you be staying?”

“No, father; I may not stay.” He had been saddened by his father’s sadness. He felt mean and shoddy to be the cause of it, but the hunger to go still gnawed in his heart.

“Will you be walking up to speak with Merlin on the Crag-top, then?” Robert pleaded. “Will you listen to his words with great care?”

“I shall go now.”

“But, Henry, the day is half done, and the track is long. Wait until the morrow.”

“I must be away the morrow, father.”

Old Robert’s hands slipped slowly to the ground and lay, half-open, on the black soil at the roots of the rose bush.

### III

Young Henry soon turned from the road to climb a broad trail that soared to Crag-top and then over the wild mountains. Its windings could be seen from below until it disappeared into the great cleft. And on the trail's topmost point dwelt Merlin—Merlin, whom the farm boys might have jeered and stoned on his infrequent journeys down the path, had they believed him harmless. But Merlin was a man who had collected about himself a swarm of little legends. It was established that the Tylwyth Teg obeyed him, carrying his messages through the air on soundless wings. Children whispered of his acquaintance with certain mottled weasels that might carry out his vengeance, had he need of such. Then, too, he kept a red-eared dog. These were terrifying things, and Merlin was not to be trifled with by children who did not know the signs to protect themselves.

Merlin had once been a fine poet, the old people said, and might have been a greater. They would softly sing “The Sorrow of Plaith” or “The Spear Song” to prove it. Several times he had taken the chief prize of the Eisteddfod, and would have been chosen First Bard if an aspirant of the House of Rhys had not entered against him. Then, without known cause, and while still a young man, Merlin had shut up his song in the stone house on Crag-top. He kept it a strict prisoner there while he grew old and old—and those who had sung his songs forgot them, or died.

The Crag-top house was round like a low gray tower, with windows looking out on the valley and the mountains. Some said it had been built by a beleaguered giant centuries ago to keep his virgins hidden while they were in that state; others, that King Harold had fled there after Hastings to live out his life, ever watching and peering with his one eye down the valley and over the mountains for the coming of Normans.

Merlin was old now; his hair and long, straight beard were white and soft as spring clouds. There was much about him of an ancient Druid priest, with clear, farseeing eyes that watched the stars.

The pathway narrowed on young Henry as he climbed.

Its inward side was a stone wall cutting into the heavens like a knife, and the misshapen, vague images along the way made it seem the rock temple of some old, crude god whose worshipers were apes.

There had been grass at first, along with bushes and a few brave, twisted trees, but further up, all living things died of the rock's loneliness. Far below, the farmhouses huddled like feeding bugs, and the valley shrank and drew into itself.

Now a mountain closed in on the other side of the trail, leaving only a broad chasm open to the sky. A fierce, steady wind poured out of the blue heavens and shrilled toward the valley. Higher up, the strewn rocks grew larger, blacker, and more dreadful—crouching guardians of the path.

Henry climbed tirelessly onward. What could old Merlin have to tell him, or, perhaps, to give him? A lotion to make his skin tough and proof against arrows? A charm? Words to protect him from the Devil’s many little servants? But Merlin was to talk and he was to listen. What Merlin said might cure young Henry of his yearnings; it might keep him here in Cambria forever. But that could not be, for there were outland forces—nameless foreign ghosts—calling to him and beckoning from across the mysterious sea.

He had no desire for a specific state or condition, no picture in his mind of what he would become once he followed his longing. There was only a burning, overpowering will to journey ever outward after the earliest risen star.

The path broke onto a top of solid stone, hemispherical like the crown of a hat; and on the peak of its rise sat the low, round house of Merlin, built of irregular, rough rocks and topped with a conical roof like a candle-snuffer.

The old man met him at the door before he could knock.

“I’m young Henry Morgan, sir, and I’m going outward to the Indies.”

“Indeed, are you? Will you come in and talk to me about it?” His voice was clear and low, lovely as a young wind crooning in a springtime orchard. There was a music to it—the quiet singing of a man working with tools. Underneath, half-heard or entirely imagined, rang the sound of harp strings lightly touched and left to thrill.

The single room was thickly carpeted in black, and the walls were hung with harp and spearhead, harp and spearhead all the way around—small Welsh harps and the great bronze leaf-spears of the Britons, resting against unfinished stone. Below them were the all-seeing windows, looking out on three valleys and a mighty family of mountains; lower still, a single bench circled the room against the wall. A table in the center was loaded with tattered books, and beside it sat a copper brazier on a Greek tripod of black iron.

The great hound nuzzled Henry as he entered. The boy drew away in fright, for is there anything beneath the blue cup of the sky so deadly as the merest notice of a red-eared dog?

“You are going to the Indies. Sit here, boy. See! You can watch your home valley now, so that it does not go flying off to Avalon.” The harps caught his tones and hummed a faint, answering resonance.

“My father said I was to come here, tell you of my going, and listen to your speech. He thinks your words might keep me here.”

“Going to the Indies,” Merlin repeated. “Will you be seeing Elizabeth before you go? Will you make grand promises to flutter her heart, leaving her breathless after you’re gone, thinking of the things you will bring back to her?”

Henry blushed deeply. “Who told you I thought at all of the little rat?” he cried. “Who says I care for her?”

“Oh, the wind whispered something,” said Merlin, “and then there was word of it in your talking cheeks and your blustering just now. I think you should be speaking to Elizabeth, not to me. Your father should have known better.” His voice died away. When he spoke again, it was with sad earnestness.

“Must you leave your father, boy—leaving him so utterly alone in a valley of men who are not like him? Yes, I think you must. The plans of boys are serious and unchangeable things. But what can I say to keep you here, young Henry? Your father sets me a difficult task.

“I went out on a tall Spanish ship a thousand years ago—it must be more than that, or perhaps I never went at all and only dreamed it. We came at last to these green Indies, and they were lovely but unchanging. Their cycle is a green monotony. If you go there, you must give up the year. You must lose the pang of utter dread in the deep winter, with its boding that the world has broken solar fealty to careen into lonely space, so that Spring may never come again. And you must lose that wild, excited quickening when the sun turns back, the joy of it flooding over you like the surge of a warm wave, choking you with pleasure and relief. There is no change there; none at all. Past and future mingle in an odious, eternal now.”

“But there is no change here,” young Henry interposed. “Year upon year the crops are put in and new calves are licked by their mothers; year upon year a pig is slaughtered and the hams are smoked. Spring comes surely, but nothing happens.”

“True enough, blind boy; I see we are talking of different things.” Merlin looked out his windows to the mountains and valleys, a great love for the land shining in his eyes. But when he turned back to the boy, a look of pain crossed his face. His voice took on the cadence of a song.

“I will plead with you for this dear Cambria, where time is piled mountain-high, with crumbling, ancient days gathered about its base,” he cried passionately. “Have you lost your love of wild Cambria, that you would leave it when the blood of a thousand ancestors has soaked its soil to keep it Cambria forever? Have you forgotten that you are of the Trojan race? Ah, but they wandered too, didn’t they, when Pergamus fell?”

“I have lost no love, sir,” Henry said, “but my dream lies over a sea that I do not know. I know Cambria.”

“But, boy, here great Arthur lived, who drove his standards into Rome and sailed away undying to dear Avalon. And Avalon itself lies just off our coasts, somewhere over the sunken cities; there it floats endlessly. Have you not heard them, Henry—the ghosts of all those good, brave, quarrelsome, inefficient men? Llew Llaw Gyffes, and Belerius, and Arthur, and Cadwallo, and Brute? They walk like clouds through the land and guard it from the high places. There are no ghosts in the Indies, and no Tylwyth Teg.

“In these wild, black hills hide a million mysteries. Have you found the Chair of Arthur, or deciphered the meaning of the circling stones? Have you heard the voices crying out in triumph in the night, or the soul-hunters with their screaming horns and packs of blue hounds, rushing into the villages on the storm?”

“I have heard them,” Henry said, shuddering. He glanced shyly at the dog asleep on the floor and lowered his voice. “The Curate says these things are lies. He says the Red Book is a book for little children before the fire, and a shame for men and older boys to believe in. He told us at church school they were lying tales, and unchristian. Arthur was an unimportant chieftain, he said, and Merlin, whose name you bear, a mere figment of the mad brain of Geoffrey of Monmouth. He spoke ill of the Tylwyth Teg, of the corpse-candles, and of such creatures as his Honor, your dog here.”

“Oh, the fool!” cried Merlin in disgust. “The fool, breaking these things! And he offers instead a story written for the world by twelve collaborators with rather slovenly convictions. Why must you go, boy? Do you not see that the enemies of Cambria fight no longer with the sword, but with little pointed tongues?” The harps sang his question, then slowly ceased their throbbing, leaving a profound silence in the round house.

Henry studied the floor with drawn brows. At last he said, “There is so much bother about me. I cannot seem to properly talk of this thing, Merlin. I will come back. Surely I will, once this burning for new things is quenched. But don’t you see that I must go? It feels as if I am cut in half, with only one part of me here. The other piece lies over the sea, calling and calling for me to come and be whole. I love Cambria, and I will return to it when I am whole again.”

Merlin searched the boy’s face closely, then looked sadly up at his harps. “I think I understand,” he said softly. “You are a little boy. You want the moon to drink from as a golden cup, and so it is very likely that you will become a great man—if only you can remain a little child. All the world’s great have been little boys who wanted the moon; running and climbing, they sometimes managed to catch a firefly. But if one grows to a man’s mind, that mind must see that it cannot have the moon and would not want it if it could—and so, it catches no fireflies.”

“But did you never want the moon?” asked Henry, his voice hushed by the room’s quiet.

“I wanted it. Above all desires, I wanted it. I reached for it and then—then I grew to be a man, and a failure. But there is a gift for the failure: folks know he has failed, and they are sorry, and kindly, and gentle. He has the whole world with him; a bridge of contact with his own people; the warm cloth of mediocrity. But he who shields a firefly in his hands, caught while reaching for the moon, is doubly alone. Only he can realize his true failure; only he can realize his meanness, his fears, and his evasions.

“You will come to your greatness, and it may be that in time you will be utterly alone in it, with no friend anywhere—only those who hold you in respect, or fear, or awe. I am sorry for you, boy with the straight, clear eyes that look upward so longingly. I am sorry for you, and—Mother Heaven! How I envy you.”

Dusk was stealing into the mountain creases, filling them with a purple mist. The sun cut itself on a sharp hill and bled into the valleys. Long shadows of the peaks crept out across the fields like stalking gray cats. When Merlin spoke again, it was with a little laugh.

“Do not think deeply on my words,” he said, “for I myself am not at all sure of them. Dreams you may know by a quality we call ‘inconsistency’—but how could you classify the lightning?” 

Night was closing in quickly now, and Henry jumped to his feet.

“Oh, I must be going! The dark is in!”

“Yes, you must go, but do not think too closely on what I've said. I may have merely been trying to impress you. Old men need a certain silent flattery once they have come to distrust that which is spoken. Only remember that Merlin talked with you. And if you come upon the Welsh folk anywhere, singing the songs I made so long ago, tell them you know me; tell them I am a glorious creature with blue wings. I don’t want to be forgotten, Henry. To an old man, that is a horror far greater than death—to be forgotten.”

“I must go now; it’s truly dark,” Henry said. “And thank you, sir, for telling me these things. But you see, I must sail outward to the Indies.”

Merlin laughed softly. “Of course you must, Henry. Catch a big firefly, won’t you? Goodbye, child.”

Henry looked back once as the black silhouette of the house sank behind the crag’s shoulder, but no light flashed behind its windows. Old Merlin sat in the dark pleading with his harps, and they echoed him jeeringly.

The boy quickened his steps down the path. Everything below was a black lake, the farm lights like reflected stars in its depths. The wind had died, leaving a thick silence upon the hills. Everywhere the sad, soundless ghosts flitted about their hauntings. Henry walked carefully, his eyes fixed on the path that glimmered pale blue before him.

### IV

On the dark path home, Henry’s mind drifted back to Merlin’s first words. Should he see Elizabeth before he sailed away? He told himself he did not like her. Sometimes he even thought he hated her, a feeling he nursed and warmed only to watch it blossom into a desperate desire to see her.

She was a creature of mystery. Women and girls alike hoarded something they never spoke of. His mother kept terrific secrets about biscuits, and sometimes she cried for no known reason. Another life went on inside women—some women, at least—running parallel to their outward existence, yet never intersecting it.

Only a year before, Elizabeth had been a pretty child who whispered and giggled with the other girls, pulling hair when he was about. Then, suddenly, she had changed. It was nothing Henry could exactly pinpoint; rather, he sensed that some deep, quiet understanding had been granted to her. This sudden wisdom frightened him.

Then there was her body—somehow different from his own, and capable, it was whispered, of strange pleasures and alchemies. Even this flowering body she kept fiercely hidden. Not long ago they had swum together in the river, and she had been utterly unselfconscious; now she shielded herself carefully, seemingly stricken by the mere thought that he might catch a glimpse of her. This new modesty both frightened and embarrassed Henry.

Sometimes he dreamed of her, waking in agony lest she ever discover what he had dreamt. Other times it was a strange, shadowy composite of Elizabeth and his mother who came to him in the night. Following such dreams, the daylight brought only a profound loathing for both himself and her. He considered himself an unnatural monster, and her a succubus incarnate. He could tell no one of these things; the village would shun him.

Still, he thought perhaps he would like to see her before he left. There was a strange power in her this year, a magnetism that simultaneously drew and repelled him, swaying his desire like a windblown reed. Other boys might have stolen to her window in the night and kissed her, boasting of it afterward, but those boys did not dream as he did, nor did they ever look upon her as a loathsome creature. Surely there was something monstrous about him, unable as he was to untangle his desire from his disgust. Besides, she could embarrass him so effortlessly.

No, certainly, he would not go to her. Where had Merlin—where had anyone—gotten the idea that he cared a farthing for the daughter of a poor tenant? She was hardly worth the bother!

Footsteps came down the path behind him, ringing sharply in the quiet night, and soon a quick, thin figure overtook him.

“Might it be William?” Henry asked politely, as the road-mender paused on the path and shifted his pick from one shoulder to the other.

“It’s William right enough. And what are you doing on the path, and the dark come?”

“I’ve been to see Merlin, to listen to him talk.”

“Pest on him! That’s all he ever does now. Once he made songs—good, sweet songs as I could repeat to you if I’d a mind to—but now he roosts up on that Crag-top like an old, molting eagle. Once when I was going past I spoke to him about it, too, as I can prove by him. I’m not a man to be holding my tongue when I’ve been thinking.

“‘Why are you making no more songs?’ I said to him in a tone like that. ‘Why are you making no more songs?’ ‘I have grown to be a man,’ he answered, ‘and there be no songs in a man. Only children make songs—children and idiots.’ Pest on him! It’s an idiot himself, is the thought is on me. But what did he say to you, the old whitebeard?”

“Why, you see, I’m going to the Indies and—”

“The Indies, and are you? Ah, well—I was at London once. And all the people at London are thieves, dirty thieves. There was a man with a board and little flat sticks on it. ‘Try your skill, friend?’ he says. ‘What stick has a black mark on the underside of it?’ ‘That one,’ says I; and so it was. But the next time—Ah, well, he was a thief, too; all of them thieves.

“People there are at London, and they do nothing but drive about and about in carriages, up one street and down another, bowing to each other, while good men sweat out their lives in the fields and the mines to keep them bowing there. What chance have I or you, say, with all the fine, soft places taken up by robbers? And can you tell me the thieving price of an egg at London?”

“I must take this path now,” said Henry. “I must go home.”

“Indies.” The road-mender sighed with longing. Then he spat onto the dirt. “Ah, well—I’ll stake it’s all thieves there, too.”

The night was pitch black when Henry finally reached the poor hut where Elizabeth lived. There was a fire in the middle of the floor, he knew, its smoke drifting up, struggling to escape through a small hole in the thatch. The house had no flooring, only rushes strewn across the packed earth; when the family slept, they wrapped themselves in sheepskins and lay in a circle with their feet to the flames.

The windows were neither glazed nor curtained. Peering in, Henry could see old, black-browed Twym and his thin, nervous wife moving about inside. He waited for Elizabeth to pass the window, and when she finally did, he whistled a shrill bird-call. The girl stopped and looked out, but Henry remained completely still in the dark. 

Then Elizabeth opened the door and stood framed against the interior light. With the fire behind her, Henry could clearly see the silhouette of her body through her dress—the fine curve of her legs and the soft swell of her hips. A sudden, wild shame filled him, for both her and himself. Without thought or reason, he turned and fled back into the blackness, gasping, almost sobbing under his breath.

### V

Old Robert looked up hopefully as the boy entered the room, but the hope soon died away, and he turned quickly back to the fire. Mother Morgan, however, jumped from her seat and confronted Henry.

“What is this foolishness? You, going to the Indies!” she demanded.

“But, Mother, I must go; truly I must—and Father understands. Can’t you hear how the Indies are calling to me?”

“That I cannot! It’s wicked nonsense is in it. A little child you are, and not to be trusted from home at all. Besides, your own father is going to tell you it may not be.”

The boy's strong jaw set like a rock, and the muscles stood out in his cheeks. A sudden flash of anger lit his eyes.

“Then, Mother, if you will not understand, I tell you that I am going on the morrow—in spite of all of you.”

Hurt pride chased the incredulity from her face; then that, too, passed, leaving only pain. She shrank from the bewildering sting of it. Seeing what his words had done, Henry went quickly to her.

“I’m sorry, Mother—so very sorry. But why can you not let me go as my father can? I don’t want to hurt you, but I must go. Won’t you see that?” He put his arm around her, but she refused to look at him, her eyes staring blankly straight ahead.

She had always been so sure that her view was right. Throughout her life she had insulted, browbeaten, and scolded her family, and they had understood her petty tyranny to be the outcropping of her love. But now that one of them—and he the child—had spoken in the very tone she used every hour, it inflicted a grim hurt that might never be fully healed.

“Did you speak with Merlin? What did he say to you?” asked Robert from the hearth.

Henry’s mind flashed quickly to Elizabeth. “He talked of things that are not in my belief,” he said.

“Well—it was only a chance,” murmured Robert. “You’ve hurt your mother badly, boy,” he went on. “I’ve never seen her so—so quiet.” Then Robert straightened, and his voice became firm.

“I have five pounds for you, son. It’s little enough; I suppose I might spare a small matter more, but not enough to help much. And here is a letter recommending you to my brother, Sir Edward. He went out before the king was murdered, and for some reason—perhaps because he kept quiet—old Cromwell has let him stay. If he is there when you reach Jamaica, present this letter. But he is a cold, strange man who takes great pride in his rich acquaintances, and he might be a little annoyed by a poor relative. I do not know that much good will come of it. He will dislike you unless you can manage to see nothing funny in a man who looks much like me, only striding about with a silver sword and plumes on his head. I laughed once, and he has not been a near brother to me since. Still, keep the letter; it may help you with others, if not with your uncle.”

He looked at his wife, who sat huddled in the shadow. “Will we not have supper, Mother?”

She made no sign of having heard, so Robert himself poured the pot and brought their food to the table.

It is a cruel thing to lose a son for whom you have lived continuously. Somehow, she had imagined him always beside her—a little boy, forever at her side. She tried to picture the coming days with Henry gone, but the thought shattered against the bleak wall of a lean imagination. She attempted to see him as ungrateful for running away; she recalled the harsh blow he had just dealt her—but always, her mind snapped back. Henry was her little boy, and therefore could not be mean or treacherous. In some way, when all this talk and pain had drifted into thin air, he would still be beside her, deliciously underfoot.

Her mind, which had always been a scalpel of reality, and her imagination, which dealt purely with the present, outward shape of things, went fondly back to the baby who had crawled, stumbled, and learned to talk. Soon she forgot he was going away at all, so deeply was she laved in a reverie of the silver past.

He was being baptized in a long white dress. The baptismal water collected in one big drop and rolled down his blobby nose, and she, in her passion for tidiness, wiped it away with a handkerchief, wondering afterward if he shouldn’t be baptized again. The young Curate was perspiring and choking over his words. He was lately come to the parish, and only a local boy anyway. He was really too young, she thought, to be trusted with an affair of such importance. Perhaps it wouldn’t take. He might get the words in the wrong order or something. And then—Robert had made a mess of his waistcoat again. He could never get the right button in the right hole to save his life. It made him look all wracked to one side. She must go and tell Robert about his waistcoat before the people in the church noticed. Small things like that were the surest to cause talk. But could she trust this foolish young Curate not to drop the baby while she stepped away?

—

Supper ended, and aged Gwenliana rose from the table, struggling back to her seat before the fire. Quietly, she slipped back into her friendly future.

“What time will you be starting the morning?” asked Robert.

“Why, about seven, I think, Father.” Henry tried to sound casual.

The ancient woman paused in her journey and looked at him sharply.

“Now, where is Henry going?” she asked.

“Why, didn't you know? Henry is going away from us in the morning. He is going to the Indies.”

“And not coming back again?” she asked anxiously.

“Not for a time, anyway. It’s a great distance.”

“Why, then I must lay the future before him—that is what I must do. I must lay it before him like the white pages of an open book!” she exclaimed in pleased excitement. “I must tell him of the future and the things in it. Let me look at you, boy.”

Henry went to her and sat at her feet while she spoke. There is a true spell in the ancient Cumric tongue; it is a speech made for prophecy.

“Of course,” Gwenliana said, “had I only known of this earlier today, I should have fetched the shoulder bone of a newly killed sheep. It’s a means of greater antiquity and better thought of than snap-prophecy. Now that I have grown old and rusty and lame, I can no longer go about to meet the spirits that wander the highroad. One cannot do as well without the means to walk among the strolling dead and listen to their thoughts. But I shall give you a thorough life, grandson, and as fine a future as I ever pondered on.”

She leaned back in her chair and closed her eyes; but had one looked closely, he might have caught a glint below the lids, peering out at the boy's set face. For a long time she sat entranced, her old brain seeming to comb out the tangles of the past in order to weave a straight, tellable future. At length, she spoke in the low, hoarse chant reserved for dread things.

“This is the tale out of Abred, when earth and water battled. From the impact of their clash was born a little struggling life, squirming upward through the circles toward Gwynfyd, the sheening Purity. In that first blundering flesh is written the world’s history, and the world’s journey through the Void.

“And thou—often has Annwn opened its fanged maw to entrap the little pinch of life thou carriest about, but thou hast made thy path to go around its snaring. A thousand centuries hast thou lived since earth and sea struggled in thy generation, and a thousand eons shalt thou carry about the little pinch of life given unto thee, so long as thou shelterest it from Annwn, the Chaos.”

She always began her prophecies thus. It was a formula taught to her by a wandering bard, to whom it had come down, from bard to bard, tracing back to the white Druids. Gwenliana paused to let her words find footing in the boy’s brain before continuing:

“This is the tale of thy present wandering. Thou shalt become a great shining for the Divine, teaching the things of God.”

Her secret eyes saw the boy’s face fall in disappointment, and she quickly cried, “But wait a moment! I go too far ahead. First there shall be fighting and shedding of blood, and the sword shall be thy first bride.”

Henry’s face lit up with pleasure.

“The whisper of thy name shall be a foregathering command to the warriors of the world. Thou shalt sack the cities of the infidel and spoil him of his plunderings. Terror will precede thee like a screaming eagle over the shields of men.” She knew now that her forecast was a success, but she hastened on to greater glories.

“The government of islands and continents shall be thine, and thou shalt bring justice and peace to them. And at last, when thou art girded with honor and repute, thou shalt marry a white-souled maiden of mighty rank—a girl of good family, and wealthy,” she finished. Her eyes opened, and she glanced around for approbation.

“I could have done better with a sheep’s shoulder,” she said plaintively, “or if I could still walk about on the highroad now and then. But age robs you of your little pleasures and leaves you with only a cold, quiet waiting.”

“Ah, well, Mother, it was a good prophecy,” said Old Robert. “As good as any I ever heard you make. You are just coming into the peak of your occult strength, I think. You have taken away my dread and reassured me about Henry’s going. Now I am only proud of what my boy is to be. Though I do wish he didn’t have to kill people.”

“Well, then—if you think it was really good!” said Gwenliana happily. “It did seem to me that the air was propitious and my eyes clear tonight. Still, I should have liked a sheep’s shoulder.” She closed her eyes contentedly and went to dozing.

### VI

All night Old Robert tossed in his bed, while his wife lay motionless beside him. At last, when the darkness in the window began to thin to silver gray, she rose quietly.

“What? Have you not slept, Mother? Where are you going?”

“I am going to Henry now. I must talk with him. Perhaps he will listen to me.” She was gone for only a moment before she returned and laid her head on Robert’s arm.

“Henry is gone,” she said, her whole body stiffening.

“Gone? But how could he do that? It is his first cowardice, Mother. He was afraid to say goodbye to us. Yet I am not sorry for his fear, because it proves the sureness of his sorrow. He could not bear to hear his feelings put into words.

“Why, Mother!” He was startled by her silence and her coldness. “He will come back to us in a little while; perhaps when the spring grass is lifting. Surely he will come back to us. I swear it. Can’t you believe it? He is gone for only a week—a few days. Oh, believe me!

“The years have slipped from us, dear, and now we are as we were—do you remember?—only closer for all the things that have been. We are rich with the little pictures of the past and the things he played with. They can never leave us while life is here.”

She did not weep, nor move, nor even seem to breathe. “Oh, my wife—Elizabeth—say that you believe he will return, very soon—soon—before you have even missed him,” he cried wildly. “Do not lie there so silent and lost. He will be here when the spring comes. You must believe it, dear—my dear.” Very softly, he stroked the still cheek beside him with his great, tender fingers.

### VII

He had crept from the house in the false dawn, setting out briskly along the road to Cardiff. A frozen, frightened thing sat in his heart, leaving him to wonder if he truly wanted to go at all. His fear argued that if he waited to say goodbye, he would not be able to leave the stone house—not even for the Indies.

The sky grayed as he passed the pastures where he had tossed and played, and the quarry that hid the cave where he and his friends had acted out the delightful game of Robbers—with Henry always acclaimed as the Wild Wag, Twym Shone Catti.

The mountains stood sharp before him, flat as cardboard cutouts fringed in silver. A dawn wind blew down the slopes, fresh and sweet, bearing the rich odor of damp earth and leaves. Horses whinnied shrilly as he passed, trotting to the fences to nudge him with soft noses; coveys of birds, feeding on belated nightcrawlers in the half-dark, scattered at his approach with startled protests.

By sunup, new miles lay behind him. As the yellow sun slid from behind the peaks, coloring the tattered mountain clouds, Henry drew a thick curtain against the past. The pain and loneliness that had walked with him in the dark were pushed back, left on the road behind. Cardiff lay ahead. He was entering country he had never seen before, and just below the morning horizon, faint and glorious, the green crown of the Indies seemed to glow.

He passed through villages whose names he did not know—friendly little clusters of rude huts where the people stared at him as a stranger. It was a joyous thing to young Henry. He had always been the one staring at strangers, dreaming up their destinations and the delicious mysteries that drove them onward. The very title of Stranger made them grand beings with mighty purposes. Now *he* was the stranger, the one to be pondered and watched with a certain reverence. He wanted to shout, “I’m on my way to the Indies!” to widen their dull eyes and command their respect. Silly, spineless creatures, he thought them, lacking the dream and the will to ever leave their sodden, dumpy huts.

The land changed. He emerged from the mountains into a broad, unbounded country of rolling plains and flatlands. He passed large burrows like the holes of tremendous gophers, where dirt-blackened men emerged carrying sacks of coal on their backs. The miners emptied their loads onto scattered piles and retreated into the earth. Even empty-handed, they stooped as they walked, as though the heavy bags still bore them down.

Midday gave way to a long, clear afternoon, and still he trudged on. A new odor laced the air: the sweet, compelling breath of the sea. He wanted to break into a run toward it like a thirsty horse. But in the late afternoon, an army of black clouds marched across the sky. A sudden wind rushed over the hills, carrying the bite of snow, and the tall grasses bowed before it.

He pushed on into the gathering storm until it armed itself with a vicious sleet that pricked his face, and a cold that pierced straight through his jacket. There were occasional houses on either side of the road, but Henry sought shelter and food at none of them. He did not know the customs of this place, nor the prices of things, and his five pounds had to remain intact for when he finally reached Cardiff.

At length, his hands blue and his face rubbed raw by the sleet, he crawled into a lonely stone barn filled with the summer’s hay. It was warm inside, and peacefully quiet after the screaming of the wind. The hay smelled sweet, like honey dried in its stems. Henry burrowed into the soft bed and slept.

—

It was pitch dark when he awakened. Half-dreaming, he remembered where he was, and at once the doubts he had shut out that morning thronged back in clamorous, strident voices.

“You are a fool,” said one. “Remember the great room, the gleaming pikes, and the bright fire! Where are they now? You will not see them anymore. They have vanished like things of dreams, and you do not even know where dreams go. You are a fool!”

Another answered: “No, no; listen to me! Think of me! Why did you not wait for Elizabeth? Were you afraid? Yes, you were afraid. This boy is a coward, brothers. He runs from a small girl with yellow hair—a mere tenant’s daughter.”

A sad, slow voice broke in. “Think of your mother, Henry. She was sitting straight and still when you last saw her, and you did not go to her. You only looked from the doorway as you left. Perhaps she has died in her chair with that look of hurt in her eyes. How can you know? And Robert, your own father—think of him now: lonely, sad, and lost. This is your doing, Henry. Because you wanted the Indies, you thought of no one else.”

“And what do you know of the future?” asked a tiny, fearful voice. “It will be cold, and perhaps you will freeze. Or some stranger might kill you for your money, little as it is. Such things happen. There has always been someone to look after you, to see that you were comfortable. Oh, you will starve! You will freeze! You will die! I am sure of it!”

Then the noises of the barn edged in among his tormentors. The storm had passed, but a breeze sighed around the stone corners with an infinite, ghostly sadness, lifting now and again into a little wail of sorrow. The hay creaked as though every stalk squirmed, trying to move stealthily in the pitch. Bats flitted about in the rafters, gnashing their tiny teeth, and the mice were screaming horribly. From the obscurity, bats and mice alike seemed to glare at him with small, mean eyes.

He had been alone before, but never so thoroughly alone, surrounded by new things in a place he did not know. Terror swelled in his breast. Time became an idling worm that crawled ahead the merest trifle, stopped to waggle its blind head, and crawled again. Hours seemed to pass over him like slow-sailing clouds while he lay shivering in the hay. At last, an owl flew in through the loft and circled above him, screeching maniacally.

The boy’s overstrung nerves snapped. Whimpering, he ran from the barn and fled down the dark road toward Cardiff.

## Chapter II

For more than a century, Britain had watched with impatience as Spain and Portugal, armed with the permission of the Pope, divided the New World and patrolled their property to keep out interlopers. It was a bitter thing to an England imprisoned by the sea. But finally, Drake burst the barrier and sailed those forbidden oceans in his little *Golden Hind*. At first, the great red galleons of Spain considered Drake a mere stinging fly—an annoyance to be crushed for its buzzing. Yet when the fly gutted their floating castles, burned a town or two, and even trapped the sacred treasure train across the isthmus, they were forced to alter their conception. The fly was a hornet, a scorpion, a viper, a dragon. They named him *El Draque*, and a profound fear of the English took root in the New World.

When the Armada fell to English guns and the angry sea, Spain was terrified by this new force emanating from such a tiny island. It was a tragic thing to picture those brightly carven ships lying on the ocean floor or torn to fragments against the Irish coast.

Now Britain thrust her hand into the Caribbean. A few islands came under her power—Jamaica, Barbados—creating captive markets where the products of the home island could be sold. It added immense prestige for a small country to hold colonies, provided they were sufficiently populated, and so England set about populating her new possessions.

Younger sons, spendthrifts, and ruined gentlemen sailed out for the Indies. It was an elegant way to be rid of a dangerous man: the King had only to grant him land in the Caribbean, then express a desire that he live on his new property and cultivate its rich soil for the good of the Crown.

The outbound ships were crowded with colonists: gamblers, touts, pimps, dissenters, and papists—all eager to own the land, and none willing to work it. The slave ships of Portugal and the Netherlands could not move black flesh from Africa fast enough to meet the soaring demands of planters clamoring for workers.

So felons were swept from the prisons, alongside vagrants from the streets of London and beggars who stood all day before the church doors. Those suspected of witchcraft, treason, leprosy, or papism were rounded up as well, and all were sent to work the plantations under orders of indenture. It was a brilliant plan. The necessary labor was supplied, and the Crown actually turned a profit on the worthless bodies of those it had once fed, clothed, and hanged. Soon, even more was made of the scheme. Whole sheaves of indenture orders, pre-sealed by the government with blank spaces left for names, were sold to certain ship captains. They were instructed to act with extreme discretion regarding the names they chose to fill in.

As a result, rows of coffee, oranges, sugar cane, and cocoa took root and spread endlessly across the islands. There was some little trouble, of course, whenever a term of indenture ran out. But the slums of London bred new slaves quickly enough, God knew, and the King was never without a fine supply of enemies.

England was becoming a true sea power, replete with governors and palaces and clerks in the New World, while ships laden with manufactured goods sailed out of Liverpool and Bristol in ever-increasing numbers.

### I

At daybreak, Henry reached the outskirts of Cardiff, his terror gone and a new wonder blossoming within him. It was an unbelievable thing, this city of houses, rank upon rank—no two of them exactly alike—stretching out endlessly like a vast army in the mud. He had never imagined such magnitude when people spoke of cities.

The shops were opening their shutters, displaying their wares, and Henry stared wide-eyed into every one as he passed. Down a long street he went, coming at last to the docks with their fields of masts like winter wheat, and clouds of brown rigging tangled in a seeming frenzy of disorder. Bundles, barrels, and slaughtered animals were being loaded into some ships, while others disgorged from their curved bellies goods packed in queer foreign boxes and sacks of braided straw. A tremendous bustle possessed the docks. The boy felt the same holiday tingle that used to thrill him when men put up pavilions for a fair at home.

A loud song burst from a ship just getting underway, the words clear and beautifully foreign. The sound of water slapping against smooth hulls filled him with a joy that bordered on pain. He felt he had come home to a known, beloved place after days and nights of mad delirium. The great song of many voices swelled from the moving barque as its brown anchor broke the water; its sails dropped from the yards and caught the morning wind, and the vessel slid from its berth to glide softly down the channel.

He walked onward to where ships lay careened, their shining sides thick with weeds and barnacles gathered across many oceans. Here rang the short, quick hammering of the caulkers, the rasp of iron on wood, and brusque commands magnified to roars by speaking-trumpets.

When the sun was well up, Henry began to feel hungry. He wandered slowly back toward the town to find breakfast, reluctant to leave the docks even for food. Now the crimps were creeping from their holes, alongside the sniffling gamblers who preyed on sailors. Here and there a disheveled, sleepy-eyed woman scurried homeward, as though terrified of being caught by the sun. Shore-leave seamen rubbed their puffed eyes and searched the sky for weather signs as they lounged against stone walls. Henry wondered what these men had seen in the sailing days of their lives. He stepped aside for a line of carts and tumbrels loaded with boxes and bales bound for the ships, only to dodge another line hauling goods from across the sea.

At last he came to a busy inn. It was called “The Three Dogs,” though the beasts painted on its swinging sign looked more like startled dromedaries. Henry entered to find a large common room crowded with people. Catching the eye of a fat man in an apron, he asked if he might have breakfast.

“Have you money?” the host asked suspiciously.

Henry let the light catch a gold piece in his palm, and, having flashed the universal sign of power, the host was instantly bowing and gently guiding him by the arm. Henry ordered and stood looking about the room.

Men crowded the long tables, leaned against the walls, or even sat cross-legged on the floor, while a little serving girl wove among them with a tray of liquors. There were Italians from the fleets of Genoa and Venice, arrived with rare woods and spices carried overland on camelback from the Indian Ocean to Byzantium. There were Frenchmen from the wine boats of Bordeaux and Calais, peppered with the occasional square-faced, blue-eyed Basque. Swedes, Danes, and Finns sat fresh from the whalers of the north ocean, dirty men who smelled of decaying blubber; and at other tables slouched cruel Dutchmen who made a business of running slaves from Guinea to Brazil. Scattered among these foreigners were a few Cambrian farmers, looking frightened, self-conscious, and alone. They had brought pigs and sheep from the country to victual the ships, and now bolted their food to flee for home before nightfall. For security, they kept their eyes fixed on three man-o’-war’s men in the King’s uniform, talking together by the door.

Young Henry lost himself in the room's lovely clamor. He drank in new speech and new sights: the golden earrings of the Genoese; the short, knife-like swords of the Dutch; the colors of faces ranging from beet-red to wind-bitten brown. He might have stood there all day, entirely oblivious to the passing of time.

A big hand took his elbow—a hand gloved in calluses—and Henry looked up into the broad, guileless face of an Irish seaman.

“Will you be sitting here, young man, alongside an honest sailor out of Cork named Tim?” As he spoke, he squeezed violently against his neighbor, nearly flinging the man sideways to clear a narrow space on the bench for the boy. There are no men like the Irish for being brutally gentle. And Henry, taking the seat, did not know that the sailor out of Cork had caught the glint of his gold piece.

“Thank you,” he said. “And where is it that you sail?”

“Ah! Any place that ships go, I sail,” replied Tim. “I’m an honest sailor out of Cork with no fault to my name save never having the shine of a coin in my pocket. And I wonder, now, how I’m to be paying for a fine breakfast, me with never a shine,” he added, slowly and emphatically.

“Why, if you have no money, I’ll buy your breakfast—provided you tell me of the sea and ships.”

“I knew you were a gentleman,” Tim cried. “I knew it the minute my eyes landed on you. And a small drink to be starting with?” He shouted for his liquor without waiting for Henry’s consent, and when it arrived, held the brown glass up to the light.

“*Uisquebaugh*, the Irish call it. That means the water of life; and the English call it ‘whiskey’—just water. Why, if water had the fine body and honest glow of this, I'd give up sailing and take to swimming!” He laughed uproariously and tipped the glass back.

“I’m going to the Indies,” Henry declared, hoping to steer him back to the sea.

“The Indies? Why, so am I, tomorrow morning. Bound for Barbados with knives and sickles and dress goods for the plantations. She's a good ship—a Bristol ship—but the master’s a hard man, stiff with religion out of the Plymouth colony. Hellfire he roars at you and calls it prayer, but I’m thinking he finds joy in all that burning. We’ll all burn a good time if he has his way. I do not understand his religion; there’s never an Ave Mary in it, so how can it be religion at all?”

“Do you think—do you think, perhaps—I could go on your ship with you?” Henry asked chokingly.

The lids drew halfway down over Tim's ingenuous eyes.

“If it was ten pounds you had,” he said slowly, and then, noting the sudden sorrow on the boy’s face, “five, I mean—”

“I only have something over four,” Henry broke in, his voice falling.

“Well, and four might do it, too. Give me your four pounds, and I’ll have a word with the master. He's not a bad man once you get to know him, only queer and religious. No, don’t be looking at me like that! You come right along with me. I wouldn’t run off with the four pounds of a boy who bought my breakfast.” His face bloomed into a massive smile.

“Come,” he said, “let’s drink to you sailing with us on the *Bristol Girl*. *Uisquebaugh* for me, and wine of Oporto for you!” Breakfast arrived then, and they fell to eating. After a few mouthfuls, Henry asked:

“My name is Henry Morgan. What is your other name besides Tim?”

The sailor laughed heartily.

“Why, if there was ever a name to me but Tim, you’d find it kicking around in a wheel rut back in Cork. My father and mother didn't wait around to tell me what it was. But Tim was on me without giving. Tim is a kind of free name you can just take without anyone raising a fuss—like the little papers the Dissenters leave in the streets before scuttling off into the shadows. You can breathe Tim like the air, and no one can put a hand on you.”

Breakfast finished, they stepped back into the street, now bustling with the trade of carters, orange boys, and peddling old women. The town cried its thousand wares. It seemed that delicate things from the far, unearthly corners of the globe had been ferried by the ships and dumped like common clods on the dusty counters of Cardiff: lemons; cases of coffee, tea, and cocoa; bright Eastern rugs; and the weird medicines of India designed to make you see things that are not, and feel pleasures that fly swiftly away. Crowding the streets were barrels and earthen jugs of wine from the banks of the Loire and the high Peruvian slopes.

They came again to the docks and the beautiful ships. The smell of tar, sunburned hemp, and the brisk sweetness of the sea breathed over them from the water. At last, far down the row, Henry spotted a great black ship with *Bristol Girl* painted in golden letters across her prow. Suddenly, the town and all the flat harbor hulks became ugly and squalid beside this beauty of the sea. Her curved running lines and sensuous sureness were a tonic that made a man gasp with pleasure. New white sails clung to her yards like the slender cocoons of silkworms, and fresh yellow paint gleamed on her decks. She lay lifting slightly on a slow swell, champing at her moorings, impatient to fly off to whatever land the imagination could conjure. A black Sheban queen she was, reigning among the dull brown boats of the harbor.

“Oh, she's a grand ship—a fine ship,” cried Henry, wonder-struck.

Tim puffed with pride. “Just wait till you come aboard and see the fittings—all brand new. I’ll go have a word with the master about you.”

Henry waited in the waist while the big seaman walked aft, pulling his cap before a lean skeleton of a man in a worn uniform.

“I have a boy,” Tim said, his voice too low for Henry to catch. “A boy who's set his heart on the Indies, and I’m thinking you might like to take him, sir.”

The gaunt master scowled at him.

“Is he a strong boy who might be of some use in the Islands, Bo’s’n? So many of them die within the month, leaving you short-handed for the next trip.”

“He’s right there behind me, sir. You can see for yourself—very well-made and closely knit, he is.”

The gaunt master appraised Henry, his eyes raking from the boy's sturdy legs to his full chest. His approval grew.

“He’s a strong boy, all right. Good work, Tim. You shall have drink money for this, and a little extra rum ration at sea. But does he know anything about the arrangement?”

“Never a bit.”

“Well then, don’t tell him. Put him to work in the galley. He’ll think he’s working out his passage. No use sparking a caterwaul that disturbs the men off watch. Let him find out when he gets there.” The master smiled thinly and paced away.

“You can go with us!” the sailor cried, returning. Henry was so thrilled he could barely move. “But,” Tim continued seriously, “the four pounds isn't quite enough for passage. You’ll be working a bit in the galley while we sail.”

“Anything,” Henry said. “I’ll do anything, as long as I can go.”

“Then let’s go back ashore and toast to a fine, free voyage. *Uisquebaugh* for me, and more of that grand wine for you.”

They settled into a dusty shop whose walls were lined with bottles of every shape and volume, from pudgy little flasks to giant demijohns. After a time they began to sing, beating out the measures with their hands and smiling foolishly at each other. But at length, the warm wine of Oporto filled the boy with a pleasant melancholy. He felt tears pricking his eyes, and was secretly glad of it. It would show Tim that he carried his own sorrows—that he was not just some feather-headed youth with a blind craving for the Indies. He would reveal his depths.

“Do you know, Tim,” he murmured, “there was a girl I left behind, and her name was Elizabeth. Her hair was gold—gold like the morning. The night before I came away, I called to her and she came out to me in the cold dark. It hung all about us like a tent. She cried and cried for me to stay, even when I told her of the fine things and trinkets and silks I would bring back to her. She would not be comforted, and it’s a heavy sadness on me now to think of her weeping over my departure.” Full tears spilled into his eyes.

“I know,” said Tim softly. “I know it’s a sad thing for a man to leave a girl and run off to sea. Haven’t I left hundreds of them myself—and every one beautiful? But here’s another cup to you, boy. When a man drinks it, wine is kinder to a woman's face than all the sweet pastes of France. Wine makes every woman lovely. Ah, if the homely ones would only put out a little font of wine at their doors, like holy water at a church, there would be a lot more marriages in the towns! A man would never even notice they lacked for looks. But have another cup of the grand wine, sad boy, and it might well be a princess you've left behind you.”

### II

They were starting for the Indies—the fine, far Indies where boys’ dreams lived. The great morning sun struggled in the gray mist, and on the deck the seamen swarmed like the angry populace of a broken hive. Short orders rang out as sailors leapt up the shrouds to edge along the yards. Circling men sang the song of the capstan as the anchors rose from the sea, clinging to the hull like brown, dripping moths.

Off for the Indies—the white sails knew it as they flung out and filled as delicately as silk; the black ship knew it and rode proudly on the fleeing tide before a fresh morning wind. Carefully, the *Bristol Girl* crept out of the harbor and down the long channel.

The mist slowly mixed with the sky. The coast of Cambria turned blue, then paler blue, until it faded into the flat horizon like a mad vision of the desert. The black mountains softened into a cloud, then a wisp of pale smoke, and then Cambria was gone, as though it had never been.

They passed Porlock on the port side, and Ilfracombe, and many vague villages tucked in the folds of Devon. A fair, sweet wind carried them by Stratton and Camelford. Cornwall slipped away behind them, league on blue league. Then came Land’s End, the pointed tip of Britain’s chin; and as they rounded southward, Winter arrived at last.

The sea rose up and snarled at them, while the ship ran before the crying dogs of the wind like a strong, confident stag, running bravely under courses and spritsail. The wind howled out of Winter’s home in the north, and the *Bristol Girl* mocked it, cutting across its face to the southwest. It was cold; the freezing shrouds twanged in the wind like great harp strings plucked by a demented giant, and the yards groaned their complaint to the tugging sails.

For four wild days, the persistent storm chased them out to sea, the ship rejoicing in the struggle. The seamen gathered in the forecastle to boast of her fleetness and tight shape. Through it all, Henry exulted like a young god. The wind’s frenzy was his frenzy. He stood on the deck, braced against a mast, face into the wind, cutting it with his chin just as the prow cut the water, and a chanting exultation filled his chest to bursting—joy like a pain. The cold wiped the lenses of his eyes clean, so that he saw more clearly into the drawn distance circling him. Here, the old desire was surfeited with a new one; for the winds brought a longing for sweeping wings and the boundless scope of the sky. To him, who would fly ahead and up, the ship was a rocking, quaking prison. Ah! to be a god and ride on the storm! not under it. Here was the intoxication of the winds, a craving that satisfied desire even as it spurred his yearning onward. He cried out for the shoulders of omnipotence, and the elements blew into his muscles a new strength.

Then, as quickly as the year's devil-servants had rushed at them, they slunk away, leaving behind a clear, clean sea. The ship rode under full sail before the eternal trade wind—a fresh, fair breeze out of heaven, breathed by the God of Navigation for tall ships with sails. All tension left them; the sailors played about the deck like wild, strong children—for there is young happiness in the trade wind.

Sunday came, a day of sullen fear and foreboding on the *Bristol Girl*. Henry finished his work in the galley and went on deck. An aged seaman sat on a hatch, plaiting a long splice. Each finger seemed to possess a nimble intelligence as it worked, for their master never looked down. Instead, his small blue eyes—after the manner of sailors’ eyes—looked out beyond the end of things.

“So you would know the secrets of the lines?” he said, without moving his gaze from the horizon. “Well, you must just watch. It’s so long I’ve been doing it that my old head has forgotten how; only my fingers remember. If I think about what I’m doing, I get muddled. Will you be a sailor and go aloft one day?”

“Why, I’d like to, if I could learn the workings,” Henry said.

“It’s not so hard to learn the workings. You must first learn to bear things that landsmen have never heard of. That’s the first thing. It’s very cruel, but you may never leave it once you start. I’ve been trying to take my old hulk ashore and berth it in front of a fire for a dozen years now. I want to think awhile and die. But it’s no use. Every time, I find myself running my legs off to get aboard some ship or another.”

A vicious ringing of the ship’s bell interrupted him.

“Come,” he said, “the master will be telling us the hot tales now.”

The skull-faced master stood before his crew, armed with his God. The men looked fearfully at him, as small birds gaze at an approaching snake, for his faith blazed in his eyes, and words of fury fell from his thin lips.

“God has struck you with only a tithe of his shattering might,” he shouted. “He has shown you the strength of His little finger that you may repent before you go screaming in hellfire. Hear the name of the Lord in the frightful wind and repent you of your whorings and your blasphemies! Ah! He will punish you even for the wicked thoughts in your heads.

“There is a parable in the sea that should close about your throats like a freezing hand and choke you with terror. But now that the storm is done, you have forgotten it. You are happy, and contrition is not in you. But take warning of the lesson of the Lord. Repent! Repent! Or the wrath will destroy you.”

He swung his arms wildly and spoke of the poor lonely dead, suffering and burning for dear human faults; and at last, he sent his terrified men away.

“That is not so,” said the old sailor fiercely to Henry. “Do not be taking stock in his crazy talk. Whoever made the storm—God or devil—made it for itself, and took joy in it. Whatever being could hurl the wind so would not bother himself about a chip of a boat floating in immensity. I know I would not, if I were that god or devil.”

The bo’s’n, Tim, had come up during these last words, and now he took Henry’s arm protectively.

“True for you,” he said; “but do not let it get back to him that you say such things or even hear them with your ears, or he will be demonstrating the might of God to you with a rope’s end. He and his God are a hard pair to be getting down on you, and you a boy scrubbing pots in the galley.”

The trade wind blew on unceasingly, and when his scouring and peeling were done, Henry talked with the men while he laid his hands to the ropes, going aloft and learning the names and workings of the ship’s gear. The sailors found him a quiet, courteous boy; he had a way of looking at them as though their speech were a great gift, and they wise, kind men for sharing it. And so they taught him what they could, for plainly, this boy was born to the sea. He learned the short and long haul chanteys: the one quick and nervous, the other a slow, swinging rhythm. He sang with them the songs of death and mutiny and blood in the sea. To his lips came the peculiar, clean swearing of sailors; phrases of filth and blasphemy and horror, washed white by their utter lack of meaning in his mouth.

At night, he lay back quietly while the men talked of wonders seen and imagined; of mile-long serpents which coiled about ships and crushed and swallowed them, and of turtles so huge that they had trees and streams and whole villages on their backs, sinking only once in five hundred years. Under the swinging lamps, they told of how Finns could whistle up a deadly storm for revenge; how sea-rats swam to the ships and gnawed holes through the planking until they sank. They spoke shudderingly of how any man sighting the dread, slimy kraken might never see land again for the curse that was upon him. They spoke of waterspouts, and mooing cows that lived in the sea and suckled their calves like land cows; of ghost ships sailing endlessly about the ocean in search of a lost port, their gear worked by bleached skeletons. And Henry, lying there breathless, drank in their words with hungry avidity.

“On such a night,” Tim stretched out and said, “I know nothing of your big snakes at all, nor have I seen the kraken, God save me! But I’ve a bit of a tale myself if you’ll be listening.

“’Twas when I was a boy like this one here, and I sailing in a free ship that tucked about the ocean picking up here and there—sometimes a few black slaves and now and then a gold ring from a Spanish craft that couldn’t help itself—whatever we could get. We had a master by election and no papers at all, but there were different kinds of flags, and they on the bridge. If we did be picking out a man-o’-war in the glass, then we ran for it.

“Well, anyway, as I’m telling you, one morning there was a little barque to the starboard, and we wetted sail to run her down; and so we did, too. Spanish, she was, and little enough in her but salt and green hides. But when we turned out the cabin there was a tall, straight woman with black hair to her, and a long white forehead, and the slenderest fingers I ever looked on with my eyes. So we took her aboard of us and didn’t take the rest. The captain was for leading the woman to the quarter deck alongside of him, when the bo’s’n stepped up.

“‘We’re a free crew,’ he says, ‘and you the master by election. We want the woman, too,’ he says, ‘and if we don’t be getting her there’ll be a bit of mutiny in a minute.’ The captain scowled around, but there was the crew scowling back at him; so he pulled up his shoulders and laughed—a nasty kind of laugh.

“‘How will you be deciding?’ he asks, thinking there would be a grand fight over the woman. But the bo’s’n slipped some dice out of his pocket and threw them on the deck.

“‘We’ll use these!’ he says, and in a minute every man of the crew was on his knees and reaching for the dice. But I was taking a long sight of the woman there alone. I says to myself, ‘That do be a hard kind of woman, and one that might be doing cruel things to hurt the man she hated. No, my boy,’ I says, ‘you’d best not be coming in on the game.’

“But just then the dark woman ran to the rail and picked a round shot out of the racks and jumped overside, hugging it in her arms. That was all! We ran to the rail and looked—but only a few bubbles there were to show.

“Well, it was two nights later, the afterwatch was for running into the fo’c’sle and the hair bristling up on his head. ‘There’s a white thing, and it swimming after us,’ he says, ‘and the looks on it like the woman that went overboard.’

“Of course we ran and looked over the taffrail, and I could see nothing at all; but the others said there was a thing with long white hands reaching out for our stern post, not swimming but just dragging after us like the ship was lodestone and it a bit of iron. You can know there was little enough sleeping that night. Those that did doze off cried and moaned in their sleep; and I need not tell you what that same thing signifies.

“The next night, up comes the bo’s’n out of the hold screaming like a mad one, and the hair all turned gray on his head. We did be holding him and petting him awhile and finally he managed to whisper,

“‘I seen it! Oh, my God, I seen it! There was two long, white, soft-looking bands with slender fingers—and they came through the side and started to ripping the planks off like they were paper. Oh, my God! Save me!’

“Then we felt the ship give a list and start to settling down.

“Well, three of us came floating ashore on an extra spar, and two of them crazed—poor souls—and wild like cats. I never did be hearing whether any others were saved or not, but I’m thinking not. And that’s the nearest I’ve ever seen with my eyes the things you do be talking of. But they say on clear nights in the Indian Ocean you can be seeing the poor murdered Hindu ghosts chasing the dead da Gama about in the sky. And I have heard that these same Hindus are a very unfruitful people to pick out, and you going in for murder.”

—

From the first day, the cook had taken it upon himself to instruct young Henry. The man seemed to crave giving information. It was a wistful instruction, as though he feared every minute to be contradicted. He was a gray man, the cook, with sad brown eyes like a hound's. There was something of a priest about him, and something of a dull lecturer, and something of a thug. His speech carried the university in it, while his unclean habits spoke of the black, bitter alleys of London. He was gentle and kind and stealthily insincere. No one would ever give him a chance to prove himself trustworthy, because the whisper seemed to come from him that if it were in the least worthwhile, he would be treacherous.

Now they had sailed into a warm sea, and a warm wind drove them on. Henry and the cook would stand at the rail, watching the triangular fins of sharks cut back and forth across their wake, waiting for refuse. They saw little brown clusters of weed go floating by, and the leisurely, straight-swimming pilot fish at the point of the prow. Once the cook pointed to the brown birds with long, slender wings that followed them: hanging, hovering, dipping, swaying, always flying, never resting.

“See these restless ones,” the man said. “Like questing souls they are indeed, and some say they are the souls of sailors drowned, souls so thick with sins that they never rest from one year to another. Others swear that these birds lay their eggs in floating nests built on planks of lost ships; and others, still, that they have no nests at all, but are born full-grown from the white lip of a wave and instantly start their lifelong flight. Ay! the restless ones.”

The ship started a school of fliers that skipped along the wavetops like shining silver coins.

“These are the ghosts of treasures lost at sea,” the cook went on, “the murdered things, emeralds and diamonds and gold; the sins of men, committed for them, stick to them and make them haunt the ocean. Ay! it’s a poor thing if a sailor will not make a grand tale about it.”

Henry pointed to a great tortoise asleep on the surface. “And what is the tale of the turtles?” he asked.

“Nothing; only food. It is not likely that a man will be making romances about the thing he eats. Such things are too close to him, and the romance contaminated out of them. But these same beasts have been the saving of a number of ships, and the means of making flesh on some that might otherwise be white bones on the deck of a derelict. The meat of turtles is sweet and good. Sometimes when the buccaneers are not in the way of getting wild beef, they stock their ships with these and so sail.”

The sun had rushed below the water as they spoke. Far off, one black cloud whipped out tongue after tongue of dazzling lightning, but all the sky save that one spot was silken blue-black, littered with a swarm of stars.

“You promised to speak with me of those same buccaneers,” Henry begged; “those you call the Brethren of the Coast. Tell me, did you ever sail with them?”

The cook shifted uneasily. “There’s peace between Spain and England,” he said. “I would not be breaking the King’s peace. No, I never sailed with them; no. But I have heard things which may be true. I have heard that the buccaneers are great fools. They plunder rich prizes and then throw their gains to the tavern hosts and brothel keepers of Tortuga and Goaves, like children throwing sand from them when they are tired of playing. Oh! great fools, I think.”

“But did none of them ever take a town?” Henry asked.

“A village or so has fallen to them, but they have no leaders for such a thing.”

“But a great town with a treasury?” Henry persisted.

“No, they have never done it. They are children, I tell you—strong, brave children.”

“Could not a man who thought and planned carefully take a Spanish town?”

“Ho!” the cook laughed. “And are you going to be a buccaneer?”

“But if a man planned carefully?”

“Why, if there were a buccaneer who could plan at all, carefully or otherwise, it might be done; but there are no such buccaneers. They are little children who can fight like hell and die very nicely—but fools. They will sink a ship for a cup of wine, when they might sell the ship.”

“If a man considered carefully and weighed his chances and the men he had, he might—”

“Yes, I suppose he might.”

“There was one called Pierre le Grand who was no fool.”

“Ah, but Pierre took one rich ship and then ran home to France! He was a fearful gambler, not a wise man. And he may yet come back to the Coast and lose it all and his head too.”

“Still,” said Henry with a grown finality, “still, I think it could be done, if only a man thought about it and considered it.”

—

In a few days they were coming close to land. One morning, the pale ghost of a mountain sat on the edge of the circle. Logs and branches of trees went floating by now and again, and land birds flew out to them and rested in the rigging.

They had come to the home of Summer, whence it goes yearly to the northern places. By day, the sun was a glaring brass cymbal, the sky washed out and livid around it; and by night, large fish swam about the ship, leaving curving rivers of pale fire in their wake. The raging prow hurled millions of flying diamonds from the forepeak. The sea was a round lake of quiet undulation, spread with a silken skin. Slowly, slowly slipping rearward, the water induced a pleasant hypnosis. It was like looking into a fire. One saw nothing, yet only with infinite struggle could one look away; and finally the mind drifted into a dream, though not asleep.

There is a peace in the tropic oceans that surpasses the desire for understanding. Destination was no longer an end; there was only the sailing, sailing, out of the kingdom of time. For months and years they seemed to slip onward, but there was no impatience in the crew. They did their work and lay about the deck in a strange, happy lethargy.

One day, a little island appeared floating in the sea, shaped like a haycock and green as the first spears of barley. It was thickly covered with a fierce, tangling growth of vines, creepers, and a few dark trees. Henry gazed at it with eyes full of enchantment. They passed that island, and another and another, until, at last, in the blackness of a tropical early morning, the ship came into Barbados. Its anchors splashed into the sea, tugging downward with the hawsers flying behind them.

On the shores lay a lettuce-green jungle, just as on the little islands; farther back were plantations with straight-laid rows and white houses with red roofs. Farther still, red soil showed like wounds through the jungle hills, and far beyond, mountains rose sharp and hard, like strong gray teeth.

Small dugout boats paddled toward them, bearing rich fruits and piles of trussed-up fowl. They came to sell, and to buy or steal whatever the ship carried. Shining black men sang rich, cadenced chants as they pulled at the oars, and Henry, close against the rail, was overjoyed with the new land. It was more than he had ever hoped. The sight brought happy, silly tears to his eyes.

Tim stood nearby, looking crestfallen and sad. At length, he came and stood in front of Henry.

“It’s grieving me to be hurting a fine boy that bought my breakfast,” he said. “It’s grieving me so I can’t sleep.”

“But you have not hurt me,” cried Henry. “You’ve brought me to the Indies where I wanted to be so badly.”

“Ah!” said Tim sorrowfully, “if only I had a religion to me like the master, I might say, ‘’Tis God’s will,’—and then be forgetting about it. And if I had a business or position I might be talking how a man must live. But I have no religion in me at all, save only an Ave Mary or a *Miserere Domine* in storms; and as to position, why, I’m only a poor sailor out of Cork, and it does be grieving me to hurt a boy that bought my breakfast, and me a stranger.” He was watching a long canoe that drew near to them, six strong Caribs rowing it. In the stern sat a little, nervous Englishman whose face had not tanned with the years, but had grown redder and redder until the tiny veins seemed to run on the outside of his skin. In the little man's pale eyes shone the light of perpetual indecision and perplexity. His canoe bumped the ship's side; he climbed slowly aboard and went directly to the master.

“These it is, now,” cried Tim; “and you will not be thinking too badly about me, will you, Henry—seeing the grief it does me?”

The captain was shouting, “Galley boy! Oh, galley boy! Morgan! Aft!”

Henry went back to where the Englishman and the captain were standing. He was amazed when the little colonist gingerly felt his arms and shoulders.

“I might give ten,” he said to the captain.

“Twelve!” the captain snapped.

“But do you really think he is worth it? I’m not a rich man, you see, and I just thought that ten—”

“Well, you may have him for eleven, but, as God sees me, he’s worth more. Look at the knit of him, and those broad shoulders. He won’t die like so many. No, sir, he’s worth more, but you may have him for eleven.”

“Well, if you really think so,” the planter said hesitantly; and he began pulling money out of his pockets, coins mixed with tangled string, pieces of chalk, a bit of a quill pen, and a broken key.

The master drew a paper from his pocket and showed it to the boy—an order of indenture for five years, with the name “Henry Morgan” nicely filled in, and the British seal at the bottom.

“But I don’t want to be sold,” cried Henry. “I didn’t come to be sold. I want to make my fortune and be a sailor.”

“So you shall,” the master answered kindly, as though granting a favor, “after five years. Now go along with the gentleman and let us have no caterwauling. Do you think I could run this ship by simply ferrying boys who want to come to the Indies? You do your work and trust in God, and it may be a very good thing for you. Experience is never wasted on the sharp albeit humble soul.” He pushed Henry soothingly along the deck in front of him.

At last, the boy found his voice. “Tim,” he cried, “Tim. They’re selling me, Tim. Oh, Tim, come to me!” But there was no answer. Tim heard, but he was sobbing in his hammock like a small, whipped child.

And Henry, climbing over the side ahead of his new master, felt nothing at all. Save for a little catching in his throat, there was no sharp feeling in him—only a heavy, sodden dullness.

### III

So Henry Morgan came to be living in Barbados by authority of a white paper which forced his life and soul and body to kneel before the pleasure of one James Flower, planter.

James Flower was not a hard man, and he certainly was not a brilliant one. His whole life had been a hunger for ideas—any ideas—and the creation of them. He wanted to conceive ideas, to warm them to throbbing life, and to hurl them at an astonished world. They would go bounding like stones loosed down a steep hill, awakening an avalanche of admiration. But no ideas ever came to him.

His father had been a stolid English curate who wrote stout sermons that were actually published, though few were ever bought. His mother wrote poetry that served as a kind of summary of these sermons, her verses appended to his volumes of rugged orthodoxy. Both his father and mother had ideas; both were creators in a small way.

—

James Flower had been reared in an atmosphere of—

“I must be walking to my publisher’s now, Helen!”

“But William, a glorious thing burst upon me this morning as I was doing my hair—such a conception! It must surely have come from God. It will be done in couplets, I think. Oh, glorious! And it just fits in with those delightful words of yours on humility.”

“Ah, well; I must be walking to my publisher’s now to see how the sermons are going. I sent a copy to the Archbishop, and he may have been talking about them. Such a thing would start a great sale, I think.”

Yes, they were people with ideas, and they often shook their heads over their dull son. He held them in awe, frightened by their greatness and ashamed of his own mediocrity. Early in life, he determined to have ideas of his own. He read voraciously. When King James’ *Defense of Witchcraft* fell into his hands, he set about proving it true. Armed with ancient incantations and a black lotion comprising a number of filthy ingredients and a large amount of hashish, he attempted to fly from the roof of his house. It was while his two broken legs were healing that he came upon Scot’s *Discoverie of Witchcraft*.

Descartes's system was then causing a stir among learned men, and James Flower, too, determined to reduce all philosophy to a basic postulate. He laid out paper and a selection of fine pens, but he could never arrive at his postulate. “I think, therefore I am,” he said; “at least, I think I am.” But this reasoning led in a circle and got him nowhere. He then aligned himself with the newly founded school of Bacon. Through persistent experimentation, he burned his fingers, tried crossing clover with barley, and pulled the legs from countless insects, striving to discover something—almost anything. But he never did. Sustained by a moderate inheritance from an uncle, he conducted experiments as varied as they were extensive.

A Separatist of fanatic intensity had written a violent book in the finest scientific manner—*The Effects of Alcoholic Spirits, Momentary and Perpetual*. This work, too, fell into the hands of James Flower, and he set out one evening to verify some of its more fantastic claims. In the midst of his investigation, the spirit of induction abandoned him, and without cause or warning, he assaulted one of His Majesty’s guardsmen with a potted plant. Had he only realized it, this was the single spontaneous idea of his life. The matter was quietly suppressed by an archdeacon related to his mother. James Flower’s small fortune was invested in a plantation in Barbados, and he was promptly shipped off to live there. Clearly, he was not suited for a life of orthodoxy and pentameters.

And so he had grown wistfully old on the island. His library was the finest in the Indies, and as far as mere information went, he was the most learned man anywhere about. But his learning formed no cohesive whole. He learned without absorbing, remembered without assimilating. His mind was a sad jumble of unrelated facts and theories. In his brain, as on his shelves, Caesar’s *Commentaries* stood shoulder to shoulder with Democritus and treatises on spontaneous generation. James Flower, who had yearned to be a creator, became a quiet, kindly little gentleman—somewhat ineffectual and profoundly inefficient. In his later years, he began to mistake conviction for ideas. If a man stated any belief loudly enough, he frightened James Flower; for the old man would tell himself, “Here is one of those divinely endowed creatures who control the fire I so utterly lack.”

### IV

There were few white men on the great green plantation. Those who did grub there were sullen, tattered wretches, serving out sentences for some forgotten felony against the Crown. Within their bodies the fever lay like a light sleeper who wakes and snarls, then slumbers again with one malicious eye unclosed. They kneaded the soil in the fields with bare fingers, and as their years of servitude crawled on, their eyes deadened, their shoulders slumped, and a tired, dull imbecility stretched cloying webs across their brains. Their language was a bastard argot of the London slums, mixed with a few words from the Guinea Negroes and a clattering of Carib phrases. When these men were finally loosed from their bondage, they wandered listlessly about for a time, watching the others go to work with a strange longing. Then, after a little while, they either signed new papers of indenture or went marauding like tigers slipped from a broken cage.

The overseer had once been one of them, and now that he commanded the men who had been his fellows, he inflicted suffering in memory of his own pain.

James Flower brought Henry up from the shore, and something in the boy’s silent misery touched the planter. He had never before been able to think of his slaves as men. He had blindly followed the injunctions of the shrewd elder Cato in dealing with them, but here was one who was very obviously a human being, and possibly a gentleman. This boy had wept, crying out that he did not want to be a slave. The others always landed already knowing their lot, displaying a sullen rancor that had to be beaten out of them on the cross.

“Do not be so hurt, child,” the planter said. “You are very young to be coming to the islands. In a few years you will be a man, and strong.”

“But it was on me to be a buccaneer,” said Henry dully. “I came out to the sea to make my fortune and a name. And how can I do these things if I am a slave toiling in the fields?”

“I do not intend that you shall toil in the fields. I wanted you—I wanted a boy to be about the house now that I am growing old. I wanted a—a kind of companion who would talk with me and hear me talk. The other planters come to the house and drink my wine, but when they leave I think they laugh at me, and at my books—my lovely books. And so you will sit with me in the evenings, perhaps, and we will talk of the things in books. Your father was a gentleman, I think. You have the look.

“Now, today,” James Flower went on mildly, “we have a hanging, and you and I must hurry to be there. I don’t exactly know what the fellow did, but it was enough. And what says—oh, what is his name? I have read it, anyway—‘The chief value of violent punishment lies with those on whom the same might fall.’ Yes, I think it is well to have someone hanged every now and then. It is expensive, but very conducive to good behavior among the rest. But my overseer attends to all that. Do you know, I think he really enjoys it.”

He led the boy to a square of thatched mud huts, built close together, each with its door opening out into a kind of central plaza. In the middle of the square, like a horrible fetish, rose a tall gallows of black wood, polished with oil until it shone dully in the sunlight. It was placed so that no slave could look out of his hovel without seeing the black horror that might one day be his end. This was the overseer’s work. With his own hands he had rubbed the dark wood until it glowed. He was accustomed to stand and gaze at it with his head cocked to one side, as an artist might appraise his newly finished work.

The planter and the boy seated themselves as the slaves were herded into the square. Henry saw a naked black figure squirm and writhe at the end of a rope. The black slaves rocked themselves back and forth on the ground and moaned, while the white slaves gritted their teeth, cursing harshly to keep from shrieking. The Caribs simply squatted on their hams and watched with no particular interest and no fear, exactly as they might squat and watch the fire that cooked their food.

When it was all over, and the black victim hung limp by his crooked neck, the planter looked down and saw that Henry was weeping nervously.

“I know it is bad the first time,” he said gently. “When I first saw it, I did not sleep for a good while. But after a little, when you have seen five—ten—a dozen—go out in this way, you will come to have no feeling about it, and no more thought of it than of a chicken flopping about with a broken neck.”

Henry’s breath still came in miserable little chokes.

“I can show you in the works of Holmaron on the practices of the Inquisition, a dissertation on this very thing you feel. ‘The first time one sees human suffering,’ he says, ‘it is an unnatural thing, because, within one’s experience, placid, comfortable people are the rule. But, after a number of such experiences, the sight of torture becomes a normal thing, and normal humans come to relish it to various extents.’ Remind me to show you the passage sometime; though I must say I have never come to relish the matter myself.”

—

In the evenings of the months that followed, the two of them sat in the black depths of the veranda, and James Flower poured his unrelated facts into the ears of young Henry Morgan. The boy listened eagerly, for often the planter spoke of ancient wars and their conduct.

“And are these things in the books that line the walls?” Henry asked one night.

“All of these things, and, oh, many thousands of things more.”

After a time Henry begged, “Would you be teaching me the languages of the books, sir? There must be things there I should like to read for myself.”

James Flower was delighted. In teaching this boy the things he had read, he had come nearer to true satisfaction than ever before. His heart grew warm toward the young slave.

“The Latin and the Greek!” he cried with enthusiasm. “You shall learn them from me; and the Hebrew, too, if you wish.”

“I want to read the books of war and sailing,” young Henry said. “I want to read of those old wars you speak of, for one day I shall be a buccaneer and take a Spanish town.”

In the months that followed, he learned the languages very rapidly because of his fierce wish to read the books. James Flower plunged more deeply into his volumes than ever, for his new role of teacher was a very dear experience to him.

After a little while, the planter began to say:

“Henry, will you tell the overseer to gather the molasses on the beach? A ship is in to buy it.” And later still:

“Henry, is there anything I should be doing today?”

“Well sir, there’s a great ship down there, in from the Netherlands. We are in strong need of sickles. The Caribs have stolen nearly all the old ones to make swords with. We shall have trouble with those Caribs one day, sir.”

“Well, see to the sickles, will you, Henry? I hate to be out moving in this sun. And have the Indians punished if they steal things. Attend to that, too, will you?”

Little by little, Henry was absorbing the management of the plantation.

One evening, after Henry had been there a year, he gained the paramount respect of James Flower; rather a wistful respect, though it cost him no affection.

“Have you considered these ancient wars?” Henry asked. “I have been reading of Alexander, Xenophon, and Caesar in their campaigns. And the thought has come to me that battle tactics—that is, successful tactics—are nothing more than glorified deception. Force is necessary, and arms, of course; but the war is really won by the man who sits back, like one cheating at cards, and confounds the enemy with his trickery. Have you considered that, sir? Anyone who can guess the minds of ordinary generals, just as I can guess the minds of the slaves, can win battles. Such a man would have only to shun what was expected of him. Isn’t that the secret of tactics, sir?”

“I had not thought of it,” said James Flower, just a trifle jealously. The same awe he felt for men of ideas now went out to Henry. But the planter took great comfort in telling himself that, after all, he was the teacher who had awakened this brilliance.

—

Two years after Henry’s arrival, the overseer’s term of bondage came to an end. He found his freedom too potent a drug for a mind so long accustomed to outside control. The man's mind snapped, and fury flooded in on him; he went shouting along the roads, striking at every passerby. In the night, his mania became a terrible, frantic thing. He rolled on the ground beneath his gallows, bloody foam spilling from his lips while the slaves looked on in terror. At length he arose, with ragged hair and manic, flaming eyes. Seizing a torch, he rushed into the fields. And Henry Morgan shot him dead as he entered the close-growing rows of cane.

“Who knows the work as well as I do, and whom can you trust more, sir?” young Henry asked the planter. “I have learned things in the books and from my watching that will make this plantation a hundred times more productive.”

Thus he became much more than the overseer.

Henry ordered the gallows removed from the square, and after that, hangings were done secretly, in the dead of night. This was not kindness. He knew, out of his own cold reasoning, that the unknown can never become the normal; that an unseen punishment was far more terrifying to the remaining slaves than one carried out in the light of the sun.

Henry had learned many things in dealing with the slaves. He knew that he must never let them see what he was thinking, for then, in some ineffable way, they would gain a hold on him that would be difficult to shake off. He must remain cold, distant, and insulting to those below him. With few exceptions, they would take insult as the definitive sign of his superiority. Men always believed him to be what he seemed, and he could seem to be almost anything.

If a man were brilliantly dressed, the world presumed him rich and powerful, and treated him accordingly. When he said things as though he meant them, nearly all acted as though he meant them. And, most important of his lessons—if he were perfectly honest and gave a strict accounting in nine consecutive dealings, then the tenth time he might steal as much as he wished, and no one would dream of suspecting him, provided he had brought those first nine forcibly enough to the attention of all men.

A growing pile of golden coins in a box under his bed gave ample proof of the validity of this last lesson. He adhered strictly to his own rules. He never gave any man the least hold on him, or insight into his motives, his means, his abilities, or his shortcomings. Since most men lacked belief in themselves, they could never place their faith in a man they understood to be just like them.

He gleaned these rules gradually from his life, until he was absolute master of the plantation, until James Flower leaned pitifully on his advice and his convictions, and until the Caribs, the blacks, and the felon white men hated and feared him, yet could make no dent in his being—could get no hold to hurt him.

James Flower was deliciously happy—happier than he had ever been—for this boy had lifted the hideous weight of the plantation from his shoulders. He needed to think no more of the tedious matters of tilling the soil. More and more, he lay drowned in his books. And, as he was growing into an old man, he read the same books over and over again without realizing it. Often, he felt a slight irritation at the careless person who had made notes in his margins and dog-eared the pages.

Meanwhile, Henry Morgan had secured for himself a great plantation and immense power. Under his captaincy the earth flowered and increased. He was making the land yield four times as much as it had before. The slaves worked feverishly under the whips that followed them to the fields, but there was nothing personal in the whips. The old overseer had delighted in punishment, but Henry Morgan was not cruel. He was merely merciless. He only sped the wheels of his factory. One could not think of being kind to a sprocket or a flywheel, and no more could this boy think of pampering his slaves.

Henry was forcing money out of the ground, and from it, he added to the hoard in the box under his bed—a little from the season’s sale of cane and a trifle in the buying of new cattle. It was not stealing, but only a kind of commission for his success. The little pile of golden coins grew and grew against the day when Henry Morgan would go a-buccaneering and take a Spanish town.

### V

Henry had served three years, and though only eighteen, he was fully grown and powerful. His crisp black hair seemed to curl more tightly to his head, and his mouth, from dealing with the slaves, had set into a firm line. He gazed about the plantation, knowing he should be satisfied, but his eyes had never lost the trick of looking out beyond the horizon, over the edge of the present. A hectoring wish ran through his waking and dreaming like a thin red thread. He must get back to the sea and the ships. The sea was his mother and his mistress, a goddess who might command him and find him ever ready for service. His very name, in the ancient Briton tongue, meant one who lived by the sea. The ships were calling to him cruelly now. His heart sailed out, away from him, with every passing merchantman.

In the big house he had devoured what books on navigation he could find, and in the plantation’s little sloop he had cruised the near waters. But this was child's play, he thought, doing little to prepare him as an expert sailor. He needed to learn avidly, for in the near future he must go a-buccaneering and take a Spanish town. This was the silver throne of his desire.

And so, one evening—

“There is a matter I should like to speak of, sir.”

James Flower raised his eyes from his book and rested his head back against his chair.

“If we had a ship to carry our produce to Jamaica,” Henry continued, “we would save a great deal in freightage. The cost of such a ship would soon enough be eaten away by the savings. We might also carry the produce of the other plantations at a smaller fee than the merchantmen ask.”

“But where might one come by such a ship?” James Flower inquired.

“There is one in the harbor now, one of two masts and—”

“Then buy her; buy her, and see to it. You know more about these things than I do. By the way, here is an interesting conjecture on the inhabitants of the moon. ‘They may be totally unlike human beings,’ he read. ‘Their necks could easily be—’”

“It will be seven hundred pounds, sir.”

“What will be seven hundred pounds? You seem not to pay attention as you used, Henry. Do listen to this paragraph; it is both entertaining and instructive—”

—

Henry careened the ship, and when he had scraped and painted her, he named her *Elizabeth* and put to sea. He possessed what horsemen call “hands”—a warm, intuitive feeling for the personality of his boat. He still had to learn the formal rules of navigation, of course, but even before that, something of the ship's spirit crept into his soul, and a part of him went back to her. It was a steadfast love, an innate understanding of the sea. By the thrum of her deck and the smooth touch of the wheel, he knew instinctively how close he could bring her to the wind. He was like a man who, laying his head against his mistress’s breast, reads the flux of her passions in her breathing.

He could have run away from Barbados then, gone to plundering in the staunch *Elizabeth*, but there was no need. His hoard was not yet great enough and he was still too young; moreover, he harbored a curious, shamefaced affection for James Flower.

Henry was content for a little while. The lust that all men possess in varying degrees—some for the flash of cards, some for wine, some for the bodies of women—was, in Henry Morgan, satisfied by the deck’s lunge and pitch and the crack of canvas. The wind, blowing out of a black, dreadful sky, was to him a cup of wine, a challenge, and a passionate caress.

He sailed to Jamaica with the crops and beat about among the islands. The returns from the plantation mounted, and Henry’s box of coins grew heavy.

But after a few months, a dull, torturing desire returned to him. It was the yearning of the little boy, revivified and strong. The *Elizabeth* had sated his old lust only to leave a new one in its wake. He thought it was plunder that called him—the beautiful things of silk and gold, the admiration of men—and upon these his heart set more zealously than ever.

Henry went to the brown and black women in the slave huts, striving to dull his hungering if he could not satisfy it. They received him, cow-eyed and passive, anxious to please. They hoped that by his favor they might receive extra food or a jug of rum. Each time, he came away with disgust, and with a little pity for their poor, hopeful prostitution.

Once, on the slave dock at Port Royal, he found Paulette and bought her as a servant for the house. She was lithe yet rounded, fierce and gentle in the same moment. Poor little slave of jumbled bloods: she was Spanish and Carib and Negro and French. The heritage of this patchwork ancestry was hair like a cataract of black water, eyes as blue as the sea set in oriental slits, and a golden, golden skin. Hers was a sensuous, passionate beauty, with limbs that twinkled like golden flames. Her lips could writhe like slender, twisting serpents or bloom like red flowers. She was a little child, yet old in life; a Christian, yet she worshiped wood spirits and sang low chants in honor of the Great Snake.

Henry thought of her as a delicate machine perfectly crafted for pleasure, a sexual contraption. She was like those tall, cool women of the night who ride upon the wings of sleep—soulless bodies, bodies of passionate dreams. He built her a tiny, vine-clad house roofed with banana leaves, and there he played at love.

At first, Paulette was only grateful to him for bringing her to a lazy, easy life, marked by comfort and little toil, but later she fell frenziedly in love with him. She watched his face like a quick terrier, waiting to leap with wild pleasure at one word or fall fawning in the dust at another.

When Henry was serious or distraught, she grew afraid; then she would kneel before her little ebony figure of a jungle god and pray to the Virgin for his love. Sometimes she set out cups of milk for the winged Jun-Jo-Bee, which keeps men true. With the frantic, tender arts of her mixed bloods, she strove to hold him securely in her sight. From her body and her hair there emanated a rich orient odor, for she rubbed herself with sandalwood and myrrh.

When he was gloomy, she would press him.

“Do you love Paulette?” she would ask. “Do you love Paulette? Are you sure you love Paulette?”

“Why, certainly, I love Paulette. How could a man see Paulette, dear little Paulette—how could he touch the lips of sweet Paulette—and not love her?” And his eyes would go wandering to the sea below, seeking and seeking along the curved shore.

“But do you surely, surely love Paulette? Come, kiss the little breasts of your own Paulette.”

“Yes, surely I love Paulette. There! I have kissed them and the charm is made. Now do be still a little. Hear the piping of the frogs. I wonder what startled the old bearded monkey in the tree there—some slave, perhaps, out stealing fruit.” And his eyes would go wandering restlessly to the sea.

As the year went on, the soil of her love thrust up thick vines of choking fear. She knew that when he finally deserted her, she would be far more than just alone. She would be forced to kneel in the field rows and grub about the plants with her bare fingers, just as the other women did. And then, one day, she would be led to the hut of some hulking Negro with powerful muscles, who would bruise her little golden body in his beast’s clutch and make her pregnant with a black child—a strong, black child that could toil and strain in the sun when it was grown. This was the fate of all the other slave women on the island. The half of her mind that was ancient shuddered at the thought, and that same old mind knew all too well that Henry would leave her one day.

Then, to her child’s mind, a doorway appeared through which her fright might pass. If only he would marry her—impossible as it seemed, stranger things had happened—if only he would marry her, she need never fear again. For those strange beings called wives were, in some curious way, by some divine intent, shielded from all ugly and uncomfortable things. Ah! She had seen them in Port Royal, surrounded by their men to ward off foul contact, breathing through scented cloths to deaden the vile smells, sometimes with little pellets of cotton in their ears to block out the cursing of the streets. And Paulette knew—had she not been told?—that in their own homes they lay in great, soft beds and languidly gave orders to their slaves.

This was the blessed state she dared to hope for. Yet her body was not enough, she knew. Too often it failed in its soft potency. If she fed him full of love, he would not come again to her bower for a time; and if she refused him to make his passion mount, he either went sullenly away or laughed and flung her roughly onto the low palm couch. She had to cast about for some compelling force, some potent means to make him marry her.

Whenever Henry sailed away with cocoa for Port Royal, she was scarcely sane. She knew his love for the ship, his passion for the sea, and she was furiously jealous of them both. In her mind she saw him fondling the wheel with the strong, dear touch of a lover’s fingers. Ah! She could scratch and tear at that wheel which robbed her.

She must make him love Paulette more than the ships, more than the sea, more than anything on earth, so that he would marry her. Then she could walk haughtily among the huts and spit at the slaves. Then she need never think of grubbing in the earth or bearing strong black children. Then she would have red cloth to wear, and a silver chain to hang about her neck. It was even possible that, once in a long while, her dinner might be brought to her while she lay in bed, pretending to be ill. She wriggled her toes in delight at the thought, and rehearsed the insulting things she would say to one fat Negress with a spiteful tongue, once she was safely a wife. That fat old wretch had called Paulette a slut before a gathering. Paulette had pulled out handfuls of her hair before they could pin her arms to her sides—but still, that black one would see, one day. Paulette would have her whipped on the cross.

While Henry was away, a trading ship came into port, and Paulette went down to the beach to see the goods she brought and to watch the wind-browned sailors come ashore. One of them, a great, broad Irishman flushed with black rum, pursued and cornered her against a pile of crates. Strong and quick, she struggled to elude him, but he held her tight, swaying on his feet.

“I’ve caught a fairy to mend my shoes,” he laughed, peering into her face. “Sure enough, ’tis a fairy.” Then he saw how small and truly beautiful she was, and his voice dropped tenderly.

“You’re a lovely fairy—lovelier than these eyes of mine have ever seen. Could a slim little body like you be thinking anything about a great, ugly hulk like me, I wonder? Come off and marry me, and you shall have anything it’s in the power of a sailor to give you.”

“No!” she cried. “No!” She slipped under his arm and darted away.

The sailor sat heavily in the sand, staring dully before him.

“’Twas a dream,” he whispered. “’Twas only a dream from the spirits. There’s no such thing to be happening to a poor sailor. No; for sailors there be only pretty hags with sharp, hard eyes to say, ‘Come! Money first, sweetheart mine.’”

But the encounter had shown Paulette a way to make Henry marry her. She would contrive to get him drunk, to trap him with wine, and she would have a priest waiting nearby to come at her hushed call. Oh, surely, stranger things had happened!

She laid her snare on his first night back from sea: a large stone flagon filled with Peruvian wine, and a priest, bribed with a stolen coin, waiting in the shadows of a tree. Henry was very tired. He had sailed short-handed and had to help work the ship himself. The little vine-clothed hut was a pleasant, restful sanctuary to him. A full white moon cast silver splashes across the sea below and strewed the ground with scarves of purple light. A little jungle breeze sang sweetly among the palms.

She brought the wine and filled a cup for him. “Do you love Paulette?”

“Ah, yes! as God sees me, I love Paulette; dear, sweet Paulette.” Another cup, and still, persistently—“Are you so sure you love Paulette?”

“Paulette is a little star hanging to my breast by a silver chain.”

Another cup.

“Do you love none other save only your Paulette?”

“I came longingly to find Paulette; the thought of her sailed the sea with me.” His arms locked tightly around her little golden waist.

She poured him another cup, and another, and another. Then his arms fell away from her, and his hands clenched.

“Oh! Do you love Paulette?” the girl cried fearfully, for Henry had grown morose and strange and cold.

“I shall tell you of an old time,” he said hoarsely. “I was a little boy, a joyous little boy, yet old enough to love. There was a girl—her name was Elizabeth—the daughter of a wealthy squire. Ah! She was as lovely as this night about us, quiet and lovely as that slender palm tree under the moon. I loved her with a love a man may exercise but once. Even our hearts seemed to go hand in hand. How I remember the brave plans we made—she and I, sitting there on a hillside in the night. We were to live in a great house and have dear children growing up about us. You could never know such love, Paulette.

“Ah, well! It could not last. The gods slay happiness in jealousy. Nothing good can last. A gang of bastard sailors roved through the land and carried me off—a little boy to be sold as a slave in the Indies. It was a bitter thing to lose Elizabeth—a bitter thing the years cannot forget.” He was weeping softly by her side.

Paulette was bewildered by the change in him. She stroked his hair and his eyes until his breath came more calmly. Then she began again, with almost helpless patience, like a teacher questioning a slow child:

“But—do you love Paulette?”

He leapt up and glared at her.

“You? Love you? Why, you are just a little animal! A pretty little golden animal, to be sure, but a form of flesh—no more. May one worship a god merely because he is big, or cherish a land that has no virtue save its breadth, or love a woman whose whole realm is her flesh? Ah, Paulette! You have no soul at all! Elizabeth had a white, winged soul. I love you—yes—with what there is to be loved—the body. But Elizabeth—I loved Elizabeth with my soul.”

Paulette was puzzled.

“What is this soul?” she asked. “And how may I get one if I have not one already? And where is this soul of yours, that I have never seen it or heard it at all? And if they cannot be seen, or heard, or touched, how do you know she had this soul?”

“Hush!” he cried furiously. “Hush! Or I'll box your mouth and have you whipped on the cross. You speak of things beyond you. What can you know of love that lies beyond your fleshly juggling?”

### VI

Christmas came to the Hot Tropics—the fourth Christmas of Henry’s servitude—and James Flower brought him a small box tied with colored string.

“It is a gift of the season,” he said, his eyes sparkling with delight as Henry untied the package. Inside was a small teakwood box, and within it, resting on a lining of scarlet silk, lay the torn fragments of his slavery. Henry took the shreds of paper from the box and stared at them. He laughed unsteadily, then buried his face in his hands.

“Now you are no longer a servant, but my son,” the planter said. “You are my son, whom I have taught strange knowledges—and I shall teach you more, far more. We will live here always, and talk together in the evenings.”

Henry raised his head.

“But I cannot stay,” he said. “I must be off a-buccaneering.”

“You cannot stay? But, Henry, I have planned our life. You would not leave me here alone.”

“Sir,” Henry said, “I must be off a-buccaneering. In all my years, it has been my single aim. I must go.”

“But Henry, dear Henry, you shall have half my plantation, and all of it when I am dead—if only you will stay with me.”

“That cannot be,” young Henry cried. “I must be off to make me a name. It is not my destiny to live as a planter. Sir, there are plans in my head that have grown perfect with pondering, and nothing can be allowed to interfere with them.”

James Flower slumped forward in his chair.

“It will be very lonely here without you,” he murmured. “I don’t quite know what I shall do without you.”

Henry’s mind carried him back to an earlier time, to his father Robert smiling into the fire and saying these same words: “It will be so lonely here without you, son.” He wondered if his mother still sat coldly upright and silent. Surely she would have gotten over it by now. People always recovered from the things they feared so much. And then he thought of little Paulette, who would be crying with terror in her hut when he told her the news.

“There is a little servant girl,” he said. “Little Paulette. I have protected her. If I have ever pleased you, will you do this for me? Always keep her in the house. Never let her be sent to the fields, nor whipped, nor bred with any of the slaves. Will you promise me this?”

“Of course I will,” James Flower said. “Ah, but it has been good to have you here, Henry—good to hear your voice in the evening. What will I do with my evenings now? There is no one to take your place, for you have truly been a son to me. It will be lonely here without you, boy.”

“The toil I have done in your service,” Henry said, “has been more than repaid by the knowledge you have poured into my ears during those same evenings. I shall miss you, sir, more than I can say. But can’t you understand? I must go a-buccaneering and take a Spanish town, for the thought is upon me that if a man plans carefully, and considers his chances and the men he has, the thing might well be done. I have studied the ancient wars, and I must make a name and a fortune for myself. Then, when I have won the admiration of men, perhaps I shall return to you, sir, and we may sit and talk again in the evenings. You will remember my wish about Paulette?”

“Who is Paulette?” the planter asked.

“The servant girl I just mentioned. Never let her go to the fields, because I am fond of her.”

“Ah, yes, I remember. And where will you go now, Henry?”

“To Jamaica. My uncle, Sir Edward, has long been Lieutenant-Governor in Port Royal. I have never seen him—because I was a bond-servant, and he is a gentleman. But I have a letter addressed to him that my father gave me years ago. Perhaps he will help me buy a ship for my plundering.”

“I could help you buy a ship. You have been very good to me,” the planter offered hopefully.

Henry was dipped in a kind of shame, for in the box under his bed glistened a pile of golden coins—over a thousand pounds.

“No,” he said softly. “I have received more payment in your teaching, and in the father you have been to me, than money could ever equal.” Now that he was leaving, Henry realized how much he had grown to love this wistful, red-faced man.

—

Strong, glistening men pulled at the oars of the canoe, sending it skimming toward an anchored ship—a vessel commissioned by the States-General to carry slaves from Guinea to the islands. James Flower, sitting in the canoe’s stern, was flushed and silent. As they neared the ship’s hull, he lifted his head and spoke pleadingly to Henry.

“There are books on the shelves that you have never read.”

“I shall come back one day and read them.”

“There are things in my mind I have never told you, boy.”

“When I have the admiration of men, I shall come to you and you shall tell them to me.”

“You swear it?”

“Yes. I swear it.”

“And how long will it take you to do these things, Henry?”

“I cannot tell. One year—or ten—or twenty. But I must make a truly admirable name.” Henry began to climb over the ship’s side.

“I shall be lonely in the evenings, son.”

“And I too, sir. Look, we are casting off! Goodbye, sir. You will remember Paulette?”

“Paulette? Paulette... Ah, yes. I remember.”

### VII

Henry Morgan arrived in the English town of Port Royal and left his baggage on the beach while he went looking for his uncle.

“Do you know where I might find the Lieutenant-Governor?” he asked in the streets.

“His palace is yonder, young man, and who knows, he may be in it.”

The palace was like a British gentleman turned colonial official, far from home. It was precisely as Robert Morgan had described. His letters dated from the Palace of the Lieutenant-Governor. Henry found it to be a low, grubby house with whitewashed mud walls and a roof of badly molded red tiles. A gaudy halberdier stood at the door, holding his great, ineffectual weapon rigidly before him while maintaining a tortured decorum against a swarm of enemy flies.

The halberd lowered across the pathway as Henry approached.

“I am looking for Sir Edward Morgan.”

“What is your business with His Excellency?”

“Why, sir, he is my uncle, and I wish to speak with him.”

The soldier scowled and stiffened his grip on the halberd. Then Henry remembered his lessons from the plantation. Perhaps this man, for all his red coat, was something of a slave himself.

“Get out of my way, you damned pup!” he snapped. “Get out of my way or I’ll see you hanged.”

The man cowered, nearly dropping his weapon. “Yes, sir. I’ll send your word, sir.” He blew a little silver call, and when a servant in green lace came to the door, he announced:

“A young gentleman to see His Excellency.”

Henry was led into a small room darkened by thick, gray hangings edged in dull gold. Three dim portraits hung on the walls in black frames: two cavaliers in plumed hats, holding their swords horizontally so they looked like stiff, slender tails, and a pretty lady with powdered hair and a silken gown that left her shoulders and half her breasts uncovered.

From somewhere beyond the curtained doorway came the thin, slow twanging of a harp. The servant took Henry’s letter and left him alone.

He felt very much alone. It was a house of cold, precise hairsplitting. One could sense a polite contempt even in the painted faces on the wall. The British arms were embroidered on the door curtains—the lion on one side holding half the shield, and the unicorn with his half on the other. When the curtains hung straight, the design was complete. In this room, Henry began to fear his uncle.

But these thoughts were shocked from his brain the moment Sir Edward appeared. It was his father as he remembered him, and yet not his father at all. Old Robert would never have worn a mustache like an eyelash, and nothing in Robert’s life could have made him pinch his lips together until they were as thin as that mustache. The two brothers might have been born as alike as two beans, but each had shaped his own mouth.

Robert had spoken the truth; this man was his strutting counterpart. Yet Sir Edward carried himself like an actor who, though cast in a ridiculous role, makes his part seem the only correct thing and all others absurd. His purple coat with lace at the neck and wrists, the long rapier—lean as a pencil in a scabbard of gray silk—the gray silk stockings, and the soft gray shoes with bowed ribbons seemed to Henry the pinnacle of proper attire. His own good clothing felt shabby by comparison.

His uncle looked at him steadily, waiting for Henry to speak first.

“I am Henry Morgan, sir—Robert’s son,” he began simply.

“I see you are. There is a resemblance—a faint likeness. And what may I do for you?”

“Why, I—I don’t quite know. I came to call on you and inform you of my existence.”

“That was kind of you—ah—very kind.”

It was difficult to force speech into this atmosphere of almost sneering courtesy. Henry asked,

“Have you heard anything of my parents in the five long years I have been away?”

“Five years! What have you been doing, pray?”

“I was a bond-servant, sir. But of my parents?”

“Your mother is dead.”

“My mother is dead,” Henry repeated in a whisper. He wondered if she had died soon after he left. He did not feel it very keenly, and yet the words sounded so tremendous, so final. This was the end of something that could never be again. “My mother is dead,” he murmured. “And my father?”

“I have heard that your father does peculiar things in his rose garden. Squire Rhys wrote to me of it. He plucks the full flowers and casts them into the air like a man amazed. The ground is covered with petals, and the neighbors stand about laughing at him. Robert was never normal; indeed, he was never quite sane, or he might have gone far with James I. I, for one, always thought he would come to some disgrace. He revered nothing worthy of reverence. Why must he do this thing in the open, with the people jeering? It brings ridicule on his—ah—relatives.”

“And do you think he is truly insane, Uncle?”

“I do not know,” Sir Edward replied, adding with a touch of impatience, “I merely quoted Squire Rhys’s letter. My position does not allow me time for vain conjecture—nor much time for idle conversation,” he finished pointedly.

The methodical twanging of the harp had ceased, and now the curtain of the door was thrust aside as a slender girl entered the room. It was difficult to see her clearly in the dark place. She was not beautiful, but rather proudly pretty, softly dressed, with a pale face and hair of fragile, pale gold. Altogether, she seemed a wan, tired echo of Sir Edward.

The girl was startled to see Henry, and he found himself a little afraid of her, much in the same way he was growing to fear Sir Edward. She looked at Henry as though he were a distasteful dish that only the strict rules of courtesy prevented her from pushing away.

“Your cousin Henry,” Sir Edward said shortly. And then, “My motherless daughter, Elizabeth.” He added nervously, as though no good could possibly come of their contact, “Hadn’t you better practice your music a little longer, my dear?”

She dropped the suggestion of a curtsey to Henry, and in a voice much like her father’s, greeted him.

“How d’ye do. Yes, sir, I think I had better practice. That last piece is difficult but beautiful.” She disappeared behind the curtain, whence came again the slow, accurate striking of the harp.

Henry tightened his resolve, though he was afraid of the man.

“There is a matter I wish to speak of, sir. I want to go a-buccaneering, Uncle—on the sea, in a great ship with guns. And when I have taken prizes, and a cloud of men gathers to my reputation, I would capture a Spanish town for plunder and ransom. I am a good sailor, Uncle. I can navigate in any sea, and I have it in me to plan my campaigns carefully. I have read a great deal about the ancient wars. The buccaneers have never been the force I mean to make them. Why, I could form armies and navies of them! In time, I would lead the whole Free Brotherhood of the Coast, and it would be an armed power to reckon with.

“I have considered these things throughout the long years of my servitude. There is a crying in my heart to do them. I believe the end of all my dreaming is a great name and a great fortune. I know my own powers. I am twenty years old; I have had several years at sea, and I have a thousand pounds. The man who helps me now—who joins me as a partner—I will make rich. I am so very sure I can do these things—so very sure.

“I ask you, Uncle, to add to my thousand pounds enough to buy a fitted ship, so I might gather free, brave spirits about me to do my will. If you place another thousand pounds in my hands, I swear to make you far richer than you are.”

The harp was no longer sounding. At the beginning of the boy’s outburst, Sir Edward had held up his hand as if to stop him, but the words had plunged on. When the harp fell silent, Sir Edward glanced uneasily toward the door. Now, he seemed to wrench his interest back to Henry.

“I have no money to risk on unsure ventures,” he said sharply. “And I have no more time for talk. The Governor is coming to consult with me at any moment. But I will say this: you are a wild, careless boy who is likely to hang for your ventures. Your father is like you, though his is a wildness of the mind.

“Furthermore, I must inform you that there is peace between Spain and England—not a very warm feeling, it is true, but peace nonetheless. If you go marauding, it will be my duty to see you punished, sorry for it though I may be. The Roundheads are no longer in power, and those wild things that Cromwell overlooked are carefully watched now. Remember what I say, for I should not like to hang my nephew. Now, I must really bid you good day.”

Tears of resentment stung Henry’s eyes.

“Thank you for coming to see me,” his uncle said. “Goodbye.” And he vanished through the curtained doorway.

Out in the street, Henry walked moodily along. He spotted his cousin a short distance ahead, accompanied by a tall Negro attendant. He paced himself so she might leave him behind, but the girl lingered on her way.

*Perhaps she wishes to speak with me,* Henry thought, quickening his steps to catch up. In the sunlight, he saw incredulously what the darkened room had hidden: she was only a little girl, no more than fourteen at the most. Elizabeth looked up as he fell in beside her.

“Do you find interesting things to do here in the Indies?” Henry asked.

“As many as one might expect,” she replied. “We have been here a good while, you know.” Touching her slave’s arm with her little parasol, she turned down a crossing street, leaving young Henry to stare after her.

He felt a bitter resentment toward these proud relatives who seemed to edge away from him as if he were foul. He could not dismiss them as silly, for they had impressed him too deeply. They had succeeded in making him feel alone, helpless, and very young.

—

The narrow ways of Port Royal were deep with muddy filth, ground into a thick liquid by carts and numberless bare feet. Port Royal bore the same resemblance to a city as the Palace of the Lieutenant-Governor did to Whitehall. The streets were little more than narrow alleys lined with dirty wooden houses. Each house featured a balcony where people sat and stared at Henry as he passed—staring not with interest, but wearily, the way sick men watch flies crawling on a ceiling.

One street seemed to have no inhabitants save for women—black, white, and gray women, with fever etched into their hollow cheeks. They leaned from their balconies like unclean sirens, calling softly as he went by. When he paid them no attention, they shrieked like angry parrots, screaming curses and spitting after him.

Near the waterfront, he came upon a tavern with a great crowd gathered outside. In the center of the thoroughfare stood a cask of wine with its head staved in, and beside it strutted a massive, drunken man in crazy laces and a plumed hat. He passed out cups, basins, and even hats full of wine to the reaching men. Now and then he called for a toast, and his crowd screamed its acclaim.

Young Henry, lost in his misery, sought only to pass them by.

“Come drink my health, young man!”

“I do not wish to drink,” said Henry.

“You do not wish to drink?” The big man was momentarily overwhelmed by this novelty, but quickly recovered his wrath.

“By God, you will drink when Captain Dawes—who took the supply ship *Sangre de Cristo* just this day week—asks you!” The looming man stepped close, then suddenly drew a great pistol from his belt and leveled it waveringly at Henry’s breast.

The boy eyed the pistol.

“I will drink your health,” he said. And while he drank, an idea came to him. “Let me speak to you alone, Captain Dawes, sir.” He tugged the pirate toward the tavern door. “About your next trip—” he began.

“My next trip to hell!” the captain roared. “I’ve just taken a good prize, haven’t I? I’ve got money, haven’t I? Then what is this squalling about a next trip? Wait till the prize is spent and the wounds are healed. Wait till I’ve drained Port Royal dry of wine, and *then* come talking about the next trip!” He rushed back into the street crowd. “Boys!” he yelled. “Boys, you have not drunk my health for hours! Come, shout together now, and then we will sing!”

Henry walked onward in despair. In the harbor, a number of ships lay at anchor. He approached a sailor sitting in the sand.

“That one looks fast,” he said, to open the acquaintance.

“Aye, good enough.”

“Are there any buccaneers of note in this town?” Henry asked.

“None but Dawes, and he’s only a roaring mouse. He takes a little boat loaded with supplies for Campeche, and you’d think he brought home Panama from the noise he makes.”

“Are there no others?”

“Well, there’s one they call Grippo, but he takes no prizes unless they go unarmed. Afraid of his own shadow, Grippo is. Yes, he’s in port with no prize, drinking black rum on tick, I’d wager.”

“Which is his ship?” Henry asked.

“Why, there she is. They call her *Ganymede*. They say Grippo stole her in Saint Malo when her crew was drunk. He and nine others tumbled the stiff wretches overside and made off with the ship for the Indies. She’s a good craft, but Grippo is no master. It's a wonder he hasn't wrecked her before now. Take Mansveldt; there’s a master for you—a real master. But Mansveldt is in Tortuga.”

“She looks a good, swift sailor,” Henry observed, “though she could carry more canvas without hurt. How are her guns?”

“They say she’s over-armed, if anything.”

That night, Henry found the buccaneer drinking in a hovel on the beach. The man was nearly black; two deep wrinkles cut each cheek, looking as though a silken cord had been pulled tight against the flesh until it disappeared. His eyes darted here and there like sentries guarding a camp of little fears.

“Are you the one they call Grippo?” Henry asked.

“I took no prize!” the man cried, starting back. “I take no prizes. You have nothing to fasten on me.” Once in Saint Malo, he had been accosted thus, and afterwards they had whipped him on the cross until a hundred sagging mouths opened on his body, each one laughing blood. Grippo had feared all semblance of authority ever since.

“Who are you?” he asked.

“I think I am going to make your fortune, Grippo,” Henry said with assurance. He knew how to handle this man; he was the very counterpart of the slaves on the plantation—fearful, and easily swayed by greed. “What would you do with five hundred English pounds, Grippo?”

The black man licked his lips and glanced at the empty cup before him. “What must I do for this money?” he whispered.

“You will sell me the captaincy of the *Ganymede*.”

Grippo turned wary.

“The *Ganymede* is worth much more,” he said firmly.

“But I do not want to buy the ship—only the captaincy. Look, Grippo! I’ll make this compact with you: I will give you five hundred pounds for a half-interest in the *Ganymede* and full command of her. Then we will put to sea. I know how to win plunder, provided there is no interference in my command. Grippo, I will give you a contract in writing. If I fail in a single undertaking aboard the *Ganymede*, you shall have the whole ship back, and you shall keep the five hundred pounds.”

Grippo continued staring into his empty cup, but sudden excitement seized him.

“Give me the money,” he cried out. “Quick! Give me the money.” Then, raising his voice: “Oloto! Oloto! Bring white wine—white wine, for the love of Christ!”

## Chapter III

There were many glittering reputations along the Darien coast and among the green Caribbean islands when Henry Morgan first became a buccaneer. In the wine shops of Tortuga, men traded tales of a thousand fortunes made and spent, of fine ships taken and sunk, of gold and silver plate dumped on the docks like common wood.

The Free Brotherhood had grown into a terrible force ever since Pierre le Grand and a small band of hunters slipped out of the woods of Hispaniola to capture the Vice-Admiral of the plate fleet from a simple canoe. France, Britain, and Holland had recognized these islands as a fitting hermitage for their criminals, and for years they had unloaded worthless human freight upon the Indies. There was a time in those old nations when anyone who could not give a virtuous account of himself was crammed into a ship and sent off as a bond-servant to any man willing to pay a pittance for him. When their time was up, these men stole guns and waged war on Spain. It was not strange: Spain was Catholic and unimaginably rich, while the Huguenots, Lutherans, and Church of England men were poor and out at heel. They fought a holy war. Spain had locked up the treasures of the world; if poor, ruined beggars could reach a coin through the keyhole, who was the worse for it? Who minded, except Spain? Surely England, France, and Holland took little heed. Often they even provided the pirates with commissions against Aragon and Castile. It was entirely possible to come upon a man who, ten years prior, had been banished on a prison ship, now swaggering under the title of “Captain by the grace of the King.”

France had the good of her wayward children at heart, sending twelve hundred women to Tortuga to serve as wives for the buccaneers. All twelve hundred turned to a trade far more profitable than wifehood immediately upon landing, but France could not be blamed for that.

They had earned their name, these buccaneers, back when they were nothing more than cattle-hunters. They had a method of smoking meat by burning small bits of fat and flesh in the fire, making the cuts exceptionally savory. This was called the “boucan” process, and from it, the pirates took their title.

After a time, these hunters crept out of the woods in small, careful groups. Soon, organized bands formed, and then whole fleets of eight or ten vessels. Finally, thousands assembled in Tortuga, buzzing out from that safe haven to sting the flanks of Spain.

Spain could not combat them. If she hanged ten, a hundred more joined their ranks. Forced onto the defensive, she fortified her towns and sent her treasures across the sea only under the protection of warships filled with soldiers. The numberless vessels of the Spanish colonies were nearly all driven from the sea by the fierce buccaneers. Only once a year did the heavily guarded plate fleet dare to sail for home.

There were fine names among the Brotherhood, with exploits that would have made Henry Morgan squirm in jealousy had he not been so confident of overshadowing them all one day.

There was Bartolomeo Portugues, who captured a great prize but was caught near Campeche before he could slip away. A gibbet was erected on the shore for his hanging, and he watched them build it from his prison aboard the ship. The night before his execution, he stabbed his guard and swam away, supported by an empty keg. Before eight days had passed, he returned with a crew of pirates in a long canoe and stole the very same ship back from the harbor of Campeche. He lost her, naturally, in a storm off Cuba, but the story was nevertheless recounted with glee in the taverns.

Roche Braziliano was a Hollander with a chubby face. As a young man, he had been driven from Brazil by the Portuguese, taking his name from their colony. Curiously, he held no rancor against Portugal; his hatred was focused entirely on Spain. He was a kindly, gentle, and beloved captain—provided there were no Spaniards about. His men worshiped him, drinking no other toast but to his name. Once, when his ship was wrecked in Castilla de Oro, he slaughtered most of a troop of Spanish horsemen and used their beasts to ride away. Whenever the men of Spain drew near, Roche transformed into a foaming beast. It was said that he once roasted prisoners on green spits over a slow fire.

As the rich shipping vanished from the sea, the buccaneers were forced to take villages, and eventually even towns with forts. Lewis Scot pillaged Campeche and left it a black, smoking ruin.

L’Ollonais had come from the Sables d’Ollone, and very rapidly he became the most feared man in the western ocean. He began with a genuine hatred for Spain and ended with an intense love of cruelty. He pulled out tongues and carved his prisoners to pieces with his sword. Spanish men would far rather have met the devil in any form than L’Ollonais. The mere whisper of his name emptied the villages in his path of every living soul. It was said that even the mice fled to the jungle when he approached. He took Maracaibo, New Gibraltar, and St. James de Leon. Everywhere he went, he slaughtered men for the fierce love of it.

Once, consumed by bloodlust, he commanded that eighty-seven prisoners be bound and laid in a row on the ground. He walked down the line, carrying a whetstone in one hand and a long sword in the other. That day, he severed eighty-seven heads with his own hand.

But L’Ollonais was not content merely to murder Spaniards. He ventured into the gentle country of Yucatan, where the people lived in ruined stone cities and the virgins went crowned with flowers. They were a quiet people, their race fading into an inexplicable decay. When L’Ollonais left them, the cities were heaps of stone and ash, and there were no more crowns.

The Indians of Darien were different: fierce, fearless, and unrelenting. The Spaniards called them “bravos” and swore they were untamable. They had been friendly with the pirates because of their shared hatred for Spain, but L’Ollonais robbed them and murdered their tribesmen. These Indians waited many years for their vengeance, at last catching L’Ollonais when his ship wrecked upon the shores of their country. They built a fire and danced for hours, and then they burned the Frenchman’s body bit by bit before his eyes—a finger and a pinch of flesh at a time.

A lean French gentleman walked into a tavern at Tortuga one night. When they asked his name, he seized a large rum keg and hurled it across the room.

“Bras de Fer,” he said, and no one ever questioned him further. It was never known whether he hid his true name out of shame, sorrow, or hatred, but all the Coast came to know him as a great, brave captain.

These were men who coined phrases meant to be repeated.

“No prey, no pay,” the Exterminator had bawled, and soon everyone was saying it. When Captain Lawrence, commanding only a small boat, was assailed by two Spanish frigates, he told his men, “You have too much experience not to be sensible of your danger, and too much courage to fear it.” It was a fine saying, and on the strength of it, his followers captured the two Spanish ships and sailed them home to Goaves.

Not all were cruel, or even inherently violent, men. Some harbored a curious streak of piety. Captain Watling made it a point to hold divine service every Sabbath, with his entire crew standing uncovered. Daniel once shot a sailor for sheer irreverence. These buccaneers prayed loudly before a battle, and if successful, half of them would troop off to a captured cathedral to sing the Te Deum, while the other half ruthlessly plundered the prize.

Ship captains maintained the strictest discipline among their men, swiftly punishing insubordination or any wrongdoing that might jeopardize their success. There were no such riots at sea as those later tolerated by Kidd, Blackbeard, and Lafitte.

Yet out of the whole history of the Brotherhood, one man towered above the rest: a Dutchman named Edward Mansveldt. In bravery and soldiery he was preeminent, having taken Granada, St. Augustine in Florida, and St. Catherine’s Isle. With a great fleet of ships, he had cruised the coasts of Darien and Castilla de Oro, taking whatever he could lay his hands upon. But there was the power of a dream in him. Out of his mob of ragamuffin heroes, he wanted to forge a strong, durable nation—a new, aggressive nation in the Americas. As more buccaneers flocked to his command, his dream solidified. He consulted the governments of England and France. Shocked, they forbade him to consider such a thing. A nation of pirates not amenable to the gibbets of the crowns? Why, they would plunder everybody. He was told to put the thought from his mind entirely.

Still, he went on planning his new government. It was to begin at St. Catherine’s Isle. He settled a body of his men there, and then went casting about for more to join his new nation. But his ship wrecked near the city of Havana, and the Spaniards strangled Edward Mansveldt on the garrote.

These were the men Henry Morgan had set out to lead. Confidently, he saw no barrier to his ambitions, provided a man planned carefully and weighed his chances. These stories and these men were all well and good, but they fell short in the grandest actions. They were improvident and vain. Still, they might help him one day.

Mansveldt was yet living, and Bras de Fer was an old man, when Henry Morgan first went sailing with black Grippo in the *Ganymede*.

### I

Excitement and curiosity gripped Port Royal as Morgan fitted out the *Ganymede* for sea. Strange stores and unusual weapons were loaded into her hold. Drawn by the quiet confidence of this young man, dozens of sailors volunteered for his crew. The captain sought out five gunners of reputation in the port and signed them to his service. When the *Ganymede* finally unfurled her sails and slipped from the harbor, a crowd of idlers stood on the beach to watch her go.

They cruised the coast of Darien in search of prey, but the sea appeared swept clean of Spanish craft. One morning, near the port of Cartagena, they sighted the tall red hull of a merchantman. Captain Morgan hid his men; not a soul was permitted above deck. Even the steersman worked from a tiny enclosure, while a dummy wheel swung idly on the deck. As they bore down upon the Spanish ship, her crew was left bewildered. Here came a vessel with no man working her. It smacked of witchcraft, or of one of those nameless ocean tragedies sailors whispered about. Perhaps a plague had killed the crew, leaving the ship ripe for the taking. But when they drew close, three masked guns spouted flame. They fired at only one spot, and when the smoke cleared, the rudder of the Spanish ship hung in splinters, leaving her to flounder helplessly. Then Captain Morgan, hanging aft and out of range of her broadsides, poured shot into her hull until the flag fluttered down. It was the first prize of his planning.

A few days later he closed with another ship and ran alongside to board. The Spanish crew massed against the bulwarks to repel the attack. Immediately, the air was filled with clay powder-pots, which landed amidst the thick cluster of defenders and exploded. The Spaniards broke, running screaming to the shelter of the hold to escape this flashing death.

When Henry Morgan came at last to Tortuga, four prizes followed in his wake, and he had not lost a single man. It was as easy as he had known it would be. Here were four monuments to his planning. One had only to do the unexpected, and do it quickly. This was the secret of successful war.

Mansveldt was in Tortuga when Morgan arrived, and his little eyes glittered as he looked upon the plunder. Soon, he sent for this new leader.

“You are the Captain Morgan who took the four prizes now in the harbor?”

“Yes, sir, I am.”

“And how did you manage it? The Spanish ships are heavily armed and wary.”

“I did it, sir, with my planning. Many nights have I lain awake considering how to do these things. I work with surprise, sir, where other men use only force.”

Mansveldt regarded him with admiration.

“I am fitting out an expedition to take St. Catherine’s Isle,” he said. “Then I intend to form a republic of buccaneers who will fight with true patriotism. Would you like to be Vice-Admiral of this expedition? I have some reputation for picking men.”

The name of Mansveldt was mighty upon the seas, and Henry flushed with pleasure.

“I should like it, sir,” he said quickly.

The fleet sailed out, and Captain Morgan went as Vice-Admiral. It was a fine assault; the ships threw in their ragged hordes, and slaughter walked upon the walls. The island could not withstand the fierceness of the attack, and finally the fortress fell. Then the Dutch admiral established his government and left Henry Morgan in command while he departed to scour the world for recruits. He and his ship were lost and never heard from again. It was said the Spaniards strangled him in Cuba.

Captain Morgan was now the paramount leader of the Spanish Main. Ships flew from the ways to join his fleets, to sail under his command, to fight with him, and to share in his success. He marched against Puerto Bello and sacked the town. The houses were burned, and the defenseless citizens plundered. By the time Captain Morgan’s ships sailed off, the jungle was already creeping into the ruins.

For ten years he sailed the ocean, navigating among the islands and along the green coasts of Tropic America, and his became the greatest name of all who had gone out for plunder. The pirates of the world came flocking to his reputation. Crowds cheered him in Tortuga and Goaves. Numberless men volunteered for every expedition. The Brotherhood waited for Captain Morgan to open a keg of liquor in the streets, to run wild through the town. He never did. He walked among them coldly, clad in a purple coat, gray silk stockings, and gray shoes with bows. At his side hung a long rapier no thicker than a pencil, sheathed in a scabbard of gray silk.

At first the sailors strove to establish a comradeship with him, but he pricked them away with frigid insults. The lessons of the slaves lived on in him. He made no effort to buy popularity, yet the Free Brotherhood showered it upon him regardless—casting their lives and their fortunes at the knees of his success.

### II

Ten years of fighting and plundering and burning, and he was thirty. His graying hair seemed to coil more closely to his head. Henry Morgan was a success, the most luck-favored freebooter the world had ever known, and the men of his profession gave him the admiration he had so craved. His enemies—and any Spaniard of means was his enemy—shuddered at the mere mention of his name. They had placed him in their fears alongside Drake and L’Ollonais.

He had gone out with Grippo in the *Ganymede*, assured that when his guns roared into a Spanish hull, when he stood embattled on a Spanish deck amid the cries and clash of iron, that flaming happiness his heart desired would finally come to him. He had experienced these things, yet they brought him no contentment. The nameless craving in him grew and flexed its claws against his heart. He had thought the adulation of the Brotherhood might salve the wound of his desire—that when the pirates marveled at the results of his planning, he would be pleased and flattered. When it happened, however, and the men fairly fawned over him, he found that he despised them for it, considering them fools to be taken in by such simple things.

Henry had grown lonely in his glory. Old Merlin had spoken truth so long ago: Captain Morgan had achieved his success, and he was entirely alone in it, with no friend anywhere. The craving of his heart was forced to lie crouched within him. All his fears and sorrows and conceits—his failures and little weaknesses—had to be concealed. His followers had rallied to the cry of his success; they would abandon him at the first small sign of weakness.

While he amassed his plunder, a little rumor had crept stealthily across the isthmus, floating among the islands and stealing aboard the ships. Men caught the whispered name and leaned in to listen.

“There is a woman in Panama, and she is lovely as the sun. They call her the Red Saint. All men kneel to her.” So went the whispering. The voices swelled until men in the taverns drank to La Santa Roja. Young seamen whispered of her during the dog watch. “There is a woman in the Cup of Gold, and all men fall before her as heathens kneel before the sun.” They spoke softly of her in the streets of Goaves. No one had seen her; no one could tell the tint of her cheeks or the color of her hair. Yet, within a few years, every man in the wide, wild Main had drunk to the Red Saint, had dreamed of her. Many had even prayed to La Santa Roja. She became the quest of every man's heart, bearing the image of some fair young girl left behind on a European beach, gloriously colored by the passing years. And Panama became to every man the nest of his desire. It was a curious phenomenon: in time, no speech among gathered men could end without mention of La Santa Roja. She had become a queer delirium in the minds of the rough pirates, a new virgin for their worship. Many said she was Mary come to live on earth again, and they added her name to their prayers.

After Captain Morgan took Puerto Bello, the Governor of Panama was filled with admiration and wonder that such a ragged, un-uniformed band of ill-disciplined men could capture such a city. He sent a messenger requesting a small sample of the weapons that had made such a feat possible. Captain Morgan led the runner into a small room that had escaped the general fire.

“Have you seen the woman they call the Red Saint in Panama?” he asked.

“I have not seen her, no, but I have heard of her. In their worship, the young men place only the Blessed Virgin before her. It is said she is lovely as the sun.”

“What is her name besides La Santa Roja?”

“I do not know. I have only heard that she is lovely as the sun. They say in Panama that she came from Cordova and has been to Paris. Her family is said to be noble. They tell how she rides great horses, sitting astride, in a meadow guarded by a thick hedge. It is said that in her hand, a rapier is a living thing, and that she can fence more skillfully than any man. These things she does in secret, so that no one may witness the crime against her modesty.”

“Ah, well!” said Captain Morgan, “if she be beautiful enough, what need has she of modesty? Modesty is only a kind of beauty patch, put on when there are visitors—an enthralling gesture. I should like to see her ride. Do you know nothing more of her?”

“Only what they say in the taverns, sir—that she has stolen worship from the Blessed Saints.”

Captain Morgan dreamed long in his chair while the runner waited silently. At last, Henry shook his head as though to clear it of cloying thoughts. He drew a pistol from his belt and handed it to the messenger.

“Take this to Don Juan Perez de Guzman, and tell him it is a sample of the weapons we used to lay Puerto Bello in the dust. But my true weapons are the strong hearts of my followers. I will not send him one of those, but I will bring him a great many. Tell him to keep the pistol for a year, at which time I will come to Panama myself to receive it from his own hands. Do you understand?”

“I do, sir.”

Within a few days, the runner returned, bringing back the pistol alongside a large, square emerald set in a ring.

“My master begs that you accept this stone as a token of his regard. He begs that you do not give yourself the trouble of coming to Panama, for then his duty would overwhelm his admiration and force him to hang you from a tree.”

“It is a good message,” said the captain; “a good, brave message. I should like to meet Don Juan, if only at sword's point. It has been a long time since anyone defied me. And did you learn more of La Santa Roja?”

“Only what they tell in the streets, sir. I inquired closely for your benefit. I was told that in the streets she wears a thick veil so that none may see her face. Some believe she does this so the poor men who meet her will not kill themselves out of love. That is all I could learn. Have you further messages, sir?”

“Only repeat that I will go to the Cup of Gold within the year.”

### III

All his life, his will had been like an iron weathervane: steadfastly pointing, but never long in one direction. The Indies, the sea, pillage, and glory—all seemed to have failed him. He had touched all things, only to watch them pale and shrivel beneath his hands. And he was lonely. His men regarded him with respect and sullen awe. They feared him, but their fear no longer fed his vanity as it once had.

He wondered if he might make a friend of one of his followers, but he had dwelt so long alone within the castle of himself that the thought filled him with a curious, boyish embarrassment. Who among them might be his friend? He considered the men, remembering their sullen scowls and the avaricious gleam in their eyes at the division of the spoils. He felt nothing but contempt for them.

There was one he had noticed, however: a young Frenchman called Coeur de Gris. Morgan had seen him in action, leaping about the deck like a supple animal, his rapier flicking out in lithe tongues of silver fire. He scorned the cutlass for that long, thin blade.

The young man answered orders with a smile. There was respect in his eyes, certainly, but no fear, no jealousy, and no suspicion.

“I wonder if this Coeur de Gris would be my friend,” mused Henry Morgan. “It is said he has left a trail of broken hearts from Cuba to Saint Kit’s, and somehow, for this, I fear him a little.”

Morgan sent for the young man, and when he arrived, found himself struggling for words.

“Ah—how are you, Coeur de Gris?”

The young man was taken aback by this sudden show of warmth.

“Why, sir, I am very well. Have you orders for me?”

“Orders? No; I—I thought I would like to talk with you, that is all.”

“To talk with me, sir? But to talk of what?”

“Well—how fare the many little loves you are reputed to have?” the captain asked, in an uneasy attempt at joviality.

“Repute is kinder to me than nature, sir.”

Morgan plunged straight to his purpose.

“Listen to me, Coeur de Gris! Can you not imagine that I may need a friend? Can you not think of me as a lonely man? Consider how all my followers are afraid of me. They come for orders, but never to pass a quiet hour. I know I made it so. It was necessary once; I had to build respect before I could command obedience. But now there are times when I should like to share my thoughts, to speak of things besides war and plunder. For ten years I have ravaged the seas like a silent wolf, yet I have no friend anywhere.

“I have chosen you to be my friend. First, because I like you; and second, because you possess nothing on earth you might think I want to steal. Thus you may like me without fear. It is a strange thing how my men suspect me. I have given a strict accounting for every voyage, yet if I spoke to them as a friend, they would rack their brains to uncover my plot. Will you be my friend, Coeur de Gris?”

“Why, certainly I will, my Captain. Had I known such a thought was in your mind, I would have offered long ago. How may I serve you, sir?”

“Oh, just by talking with me now and then, and by trusting me a little. I have no motive save my loneliness. But you speak and act like a gentleman, Coeur de Gris. May I ask of your family? Or do you draw this name around you like a cape, as so many do here on the Main?”

“It is very simple to tell you of my family. They say my father was the great Bras de Fer, though who he truly was, no one ever knew. The people gave me my name in memory of his. My mother is one of the free women of Goaves; she was sixteen when I was born. Hers was an ancient family, but Huguenot in worship. Their holdings were destroyed in the massacres of St. Bartholomew, so they were penniless by the time my mother was born. She was swept up by the watch in the Paris streets one day and sent to Goaves with a shipload of vagrant women. Bras de Fer found her soon after.”

“But you say she is a free woman,” Morgan said, scandalized by the young man’s apparent lack of shame. “Surely she has given up this—this practice, now that you are successful on the sea. You take home enough for both of you, and more.”

“I know I do, yet she continues. I do not mention it; why should I interfere with what she considers serious work? She is proud of her position, proud that her callers are the best people in the port. It pleases her that, though she is nearly forty, she can still outshine the young, unseasoned squabs brought in every year. Why should I change the gentle course of her ways, even if I could? She is a dear, lovely woman, and has been a good mother to me. Her only fault is that she is plagued by too many little scruples. She nags at me when I am home, and cries so when I leave. She is dreadfully afraid I may find some woman who will do me harm.”

“Strange, is it not?—considering her life,” Morgan observed.

“Why is it strange? Must one possess a different brain for that ancient profession? No, sir; I assure you her life is immaculate—prayers thrice a day, and there is no finer house in all Goaves than hers. Why, when last I visited, I brought her a scarf that fell to my lot in the division, a glorious thing of gossamer and gold. But she would not have it. It belonged about the neck of some woman who put her faith in the Romish church, she said, and it would not be decent for a good Huguenot to wear it. Ah! She worries so about me when I am off to sea. She is terrified I may be hurt, but far more afraid for the tainting of my soul. That, sir, is all my knowledge of my family.”

Morgan stepped to a cupboard and brought out some queer little jugs of Peruvian wine. Each jug had two necks; when the wine was poured from one, a sweet, whistling sound sighed from the other.

“I took these from a Spanish ship,” he said. “Will you drink with me, Coeur de Gris?”

“I should be very much honored, sir.”

They sat a long time sipping the wine, before Morgan spoke, his voice taking on a dreamy cadence.

“I suppose, Coeur de Gris, that you will one day be stricken by the Red Saint, and then we shall have the bees of Panama swarming out upon us. I have no doubt she is as jealously guarded as Helen of Troy. You have heard of the Red Saint, have you not?”

The young man’s eyes glowed with the wine.

“Heard of her!” he said softly. “Sir, I have dreamed of her and called to her in my sleep. Who has not? Who in this quarter of the world has not heard of her—yet who knows a single true thing about her? It is a strange thing, the magic of this woman’s name. La Santa Roja! La Santa Roja! It conjures desire in the heart of every man—not a practical, attainable desire, but the ‘if I were handsome, if I were a prince’ kind of desire. The young men make wild plans: some to go disguised to Panama, others to blow it apart with powder. They daydream of carrying the Red Saint away with them. Sir, I have heard a seaman, rotten with disease, whispering to himself in the night: ‘If this rot were not upon me, I would go adventuring for La Santa Roja.’

“My mother frets endlessly in Goaves, lest I go mad and seek her out. She is terrified of this strange woman. ‘Go not near to her, my son,’ she says. ‘This woman is wicked; she is a devil; besides, she is without doubt a Catholic.’ And yet no one we know of has ever seen her. We do not even know for certain that such a woman as the Red Saint exists in the Cup of Gold. Ah! She has spread the sea with dreams—with longing, impossible dreams. I have been thinking, sir, that perhaps someday the Cup of Gold may go the way of Troy town on account of her.”

Morgan had filled the glasses again and again. He slumped forward in his chair, a crooked little smile playing on his lips.

“Yes,” he said thickly, “she is a danger to the peace of nations and to the peace of men’s minds. The matter is wholly ridiculous, of course. She is likely a shrewish bitch who borrows her bright features from the legend. But how might such a legend be started? Your health, Coeur de Gris. You will be a good and true friend to me?”

“I will, my Captain.”

Again they sat in silence, drinking the rich wine.

“There is much suffering bound up in women,” Morgan began, as though continuing an uninterrupted thought. “They seem to carry pain about with them like a leaking package. You have loved often, they say, Coeur de Gris. Have you not felt the pain they carry?”

“No, sir, I do not think I have. I have been assailed by regrets and little sorrows, certainly—everyone has—but mostly I have found only pleasure among women.”

“Ah, you are fortunate,” the captain said. “You are lucky not to have known such pain. My own life was poisoned by love. This life I lead was forced upon me by a love I lost.”

“Why, how was that, sir? I had not thought that you—”

“I know. I know how I must have changed, for even you laugh a little at the thought of me in love. I could not now command the affection of an Earl’s daughter.”

“The daughter of an Earl, sir?”

“Yes, an Earl’s daughter. We loved too perfectly—too passionately. Once, she came to me in a rose garden and lay in my arms until the dark faded. I thought to run away with her to some new, lovely country, and sink her title in the sea behind us. Perhaps even now I might have been living safely in Virginia, with little joys crowding my footstool.”

“It is a great pity, sir.” Coeur de Gris was truly sorry for this man.

“Ah, well; her father was informed. One dark night, my arms were pinned to my sides, and she—oh, dear Elizabeth!—was torn from me. They threw me, still bound, into a ship, and sold me in Barbados. Can you not see, Coeur de Gris, the bitterness that churns restlessly in my heart? All these years, her face has haunted me in my wanderings. Somehow, I feel I should have found a way back to her—but her father was a powerful lord.”

“And did you never go back for her, after your imprisonment was done?”

Morgan looked down at the floor.

“No, my friend. I never did.”

### IV

The legend of the Red Saint twined through his brain like a fast-growing vine, and a voice called out of the west to coax and mock, to jeer and cozen Henry Morgan. He forgot the sea and his idling ships. The buccaneers were penniless from their long inactivity. They lay about the decks and cursed their captain for a dreaming fool. He struggled madly against the suffocating meshes of his dream and argued with the voice.

“May God damn La Santa Roja for sowing the world with insanity. She has made cutthroats bay at the moon like lovesick dogs. She is driving me mad with this vain desire. I must do something—anything—to lay to rest the insistent haunting of a woman I have never seen. I must destroy the ghost. Ah, it is a foolish thing to dream of capturing the Cup of Gold. It would seem my only desire is death.”

He remembered the hunger that had first drawn him from Cambria; it was duplicated now, and magnified. His fevered thoughts drove sleep away. When drowsiness finally crept in on the heels of exhaustion, La Santa Roja slipped in beside it.

“I will take Maracaibo,” he cried in desperation. “I will drown this lust in a bowl of horror. I will pillage Maracaibo, tear it to pieces, and leave it bleeding on the sand.”

(There is a woman in the Cup of Gold, and they worship her for unnamable beauties.)

“Make the gathering at the Isle de la Vaca! Call in true hearts from the corners of the sea! We go to riches!”

His ships flew out to the bay of Maracaibo, finding the town frantic in its defense.

“Run into this bottle harbor! Yes, under the guns!”

Cannonballs shrieked through the air, throwing up clouds of dirt from the walls, but the defenders held their ground.

“It will not fall? Then take it in assault!”

Powder-pots sailed over the walls, tearing and maiming the defenders in fiery bursts.

“Who are these wolves?” they cried. “Ah, brothers! we must fight until we die! We must ask no clemency, brothers. If we fall, our dear city—”

Ladders rose against the fort, and a roaring wave of men swarmed over the parapets.

“Ah, San Lorenzo! hide us! bear us away! These are no men, but devils. Hear me! Hear me! Quarter! Ah, Jesus! where art thou now?”

“Throw down the walls! Let no two stones stand together!”

(There is a woman in the Cup of Gold, and she is lovely as the sun.)

“Grant no quarter! Kill the Spanish rats! Kill all of them!”

Soon, Maracaibo lay pleading at his feet. Doors were splintered from their hinges, and the houses gutted of every movable thing. The women were herded into a church and locked inside. Then, the prisoners were dragged before Henry Morgan.

“Here is an old man, sir. We are sure he has riches, but he has hidden them away and we can never find any.”

“Then put his feet in the fire!—why, he is a brazen fool! Break his arms!—He will not tell? Put the whipcord about his temples!—Oh, kill him! kill him and stop his screaming—Perhaps he had no money—”

(There is a woman in Panama—)

“Have you scratched out every grain of gold? Place the city at ransom! We must have riches after pain.”

A fleet of Spanish ships appeared, sailing to the rescue.

“A Spanish squadron coming? We will fight them! No, no; we shall run from them if we can get away. Our hulls lag in the water with their weight of gold. Kill the prisoners!”

(—she is lovely as the sun.)

And so Captain Morgan sailed from a broken Maracaibo. Two hundred and fifty thousand pieces of eight lay deep in his holds, alongside rolls of silken stuffs, heavy plates of silver, and sacks of fragrant spices. There were golden images stripped from the Cathedral, and holy vestments crusted in the embroidery of pearls. Behind them, the city was left a fire-swept wreck.

“We are richer than we could have hoped. There will be joy in Tortuga when we come. Every man a hero! We shall have a mad riot of a time.”

(La Santa Roja is in Panama.)

“Ah, God! then if I must, I must. But I fear I go to my death. It is a dreadful thing to be attempting. If this is my desire, I must do it, though I die.” He called young Coeur de Gris to him.

“You have distinguished yourself in this fight, my friend.”

“I have done what was necessary, sir.”

“But you fought finely. I saw you when we engaged. Now I have made you my lieutenant in the field, my second in command. You are brave, you are sagacious, and you are my friend. I can trust you, and who else among my men would honor this trust if it were worth his while to fail?”

“It is a great honor, sir. I will pay you, surely, with my fidelity. My mother will be very pleased.”

“Yes,” said Captain Morgan; “you are a young fool, and that is a virtue in this business as long as one has a leader. Now the men are straining to return so they might spend their plunder. If it were possible, they would push the ships from behind to hurry them along. What will you do with your money, Coeur de Gris?”

“Why, I shall send half to my mother. The remaining sum I shall divide in two. One part I shall put away, and on the other I expect to be drunk for a few days, or perhaps a week. It is good to be drunk after fighting.”

“Drunkenness has never been a pleasure to me,” the captain said. “It makes me very sad. But I have a new venture turning over in my brain. Coeur de Gris, what is the richest city of the western world? What place has been immune to the slightest gesture of the Brotherhood? Where might we all make millions?”

“But, sir, you do not think—Surely you cannot consider it possible to take—”

“I will take Panama—even the Cup of Gold.”

“How may you do this thing? The city is strongly guarded by walls and troops, and the way across the isthmus is nigh impassable but for a single burro trail. How will you do this thing?”

“I must take Panama. I must capture the Cup of Gold.” The captain’s jaw set fiercely.

Now Coeur de Gris was smiling quietly.

“Why do you grin at me?” demanded Captain Morgan.

“I was thinking of a chance remark I made a little time ago, that Panama was like to go the way of Troy town.”

“Ah! this nameless woman is in your mind. Dismiss her! It may be there exists no such woman.”

“But then, sir, we are rich enough from this last spoil.”

“It would be no evil thing to grow richer. I am tired of plundering. I would rest securely.”

Coeur de Gris hesitated a moment, his eyes clouded by a soft, distant veil.

“I am thinking, sir, that when we come to Panama every man will be at his friend’s throat over the Red Saint.”

“Oh, you may trust me to keep order among my men—strict order—though I hang half of them to do it. A while ago I sent word to Panama that I would go there, but I did it as a joke. And I wonder, now, whether they have been fortifying themselves. Perhaps they, too, thought it a joke. Go now, Coeur de Gris, and speak to no man of this. I make you my ambassador. Let the men throw their gold away. Encourage gambling—here—now—on the ship. Give them an example at the taverns—an expensive example. Then they will be driven to go out with me. I must have an army this time, my friend, and even then we may all die. Perhaps that is the chief joy of life—to risk it. Do my work well, Coeur de Gris, and it may be that one day you will be richer than you can imagine.”

Young Coeur de Gris stood musing by the mast.

“Our captain, our cold captain, has been bitten by this great, nebulous rumoring. How strange this pattern is! It is as though the Red Saint had been stolen from my arms. My dream is violated. I wonder if, when they know, every man will carry this same feeling of bitter loss—will hate the captain for stealing his desire.”

### V

Sir Edward Morgan led his forces against St. Eustatius. While the battle raged, a slim, brown Indian slipped up and drove a long knife into his stomach. The Lieutenant-Governor set his lips in a straight, hard line and crumpled to the ground.

“My white breeches will be ruined,” he thought. “Why did the devil have to do it just when we were getting on so nicely? I should have won special thanks from His Majesty, and now I shall not be here to receive them. Heaven! He chose a painful place!” And then the full tragedy struck him.

“An ordinary knife,” he muttered, “and in the stomach. I should have preferred a sword in the hand of an equal—but a knife—in the stomach! I must look thoroughly disreputable with all this blood and dirt on me. And I cannot straighten up! Christ! The wretch struck a sensitive spot.”

His men bore him sadly back to Port Royal.

“It was unavoidable,” he told the Governor, “slipped up on me with a knife and stabbed me in the stomach. Such a little devil he couldn’t reach any higher, I suppose. Report the affair to the Crown, will you, sir? And please do not mention the knife—or the stomach. And now, will you leave me with my daughter? I shall be dying soon.”

Elizabeth stood beside his bed in the darkened room.

“Are you hurt badly, Father?”

“Yes, quite badly. I shall die presently.”

“Nonsense, Papa; you are only joking to excite me.”

“Elizabeth, does it sound like nonsense—and have you ever known me to joke? I have several things we must speak of, and the time is very short. What will you do? There is little money left. We have been living on my salary ever since the King made his last general suggestion for a loan.”

“But what are you talking about, Papa! You cannot die and leave me here alone and stranded in the colonies. You cannot, cannot do it!”

“Whether I can or not, I shall die presently. Now, let us discuss this matter while we still can. Perhaps your cousin, who has come to such fame through robbery, will care for you, Elizabeth. I am pained at the thought, but—but—it is necessary to live—very necessary. And after all, he is your cousin.”

“I will not believe it. I simply will not believe it. You cannot die!”

“You must stay with the Governor until you can meet your cousin. Tell him the exact state of affairs; no fawning—but do not be too proud. Remember, he is your own blood cousin, even though he is a robber.” His heavy breathing filled the room. Elizabeth had begun to cry softly, like a child who cannot quite tell whether or not it is hurt. At last, words forced themselves from Sir Edward’s lips.

“I have heard that you can tell a gentleman by the way he dies—but I should like to groan. Robert would have groaned if he had wished. Of course, Robert was queer—but then—he was my own brother—he would have shrieked if he had felt like it. Elizabeth, will you—please—leave the room? I am sorry—but I must groan. Never speak of it—Elizabeth—you promise—never—never to speak of it?”

And when she returned, Sir Edward Morgan was dead.

### VI

Spring had come to Cambria, welling up from the Indies and the hot, dry heart of Africa. It was the fifteenth spring since Henry had gone away. Old Robert liked to think—and eventually came to believe—that his son sent the spring to Cambria from those tropic places. A green fur climbed the hills, and the trees tested their new, fragile leaves against the wind.

Old Robert’s face had grown severe. Around his mouth lived not a smile but a grimace, as though some ancient, anguished joy had frozen there. The years had been lonely, barren things, holding nothing in their arms for him. He finally understood Gwenliana’s words: that age brought nothing but a cold, restless waiting—a dull expectancy of a state that could not be imagined with any certainty. Perhaps he waited for Henry to return. But that could scarcely be true; he was no longer sure he even wanted to see Henry again. It would be disturbing, and when one is old, one hates disturbing things.

For a long time he had wondered, *What is Henry doing now? What is he seeing?* Eventually, the boy had faded, becoming like a figure in an old book—not entirely real, yet real enough to be remembered. Still, Robert thought often of this abstract person, his son, of whom he heard wavering rumors now and again.

Waking on this fine spring morning, Robert told himself, “I will climb up to see Merlin today. Strange how that old man survives under the crushing weight of his years. There must be more than a hundred of them now. His body is a mere wisp, a suggestion that a body once existed there. But William says—if you can pluck a coherent thought from William’s speech—that Merlin's voice remains golden and strong, and that he still spouts tremendous nonsense that would never be tolerated in London. It is amazing how this road-mender has curled his entire life like a kitten around four days spent in London. But I must go to Merlin. It is unlikely I shall make the journey again.”

The steep, rocky path was a torture to him, made crueler by his memory of lithe, powerful legs and lungs as tireless as bellows. Once he had led all comers in the mountain race; now he climbed a little, rested on a stone, and climbed again—up into the cleft and over the rock's shoulder. It was noon when he finally reached Crag-top.

Merlin met him at the door before he could even knock. The old man had changed no more than the harps and spearheads hanging on his walls, seeming to have discarded time like a worn garment. Merlin greeted Robert without surprise, as if he had anticipated this slow pilgrimage a thousand years before it began.

“It has been very long, Robert, since you climbed this path to me, and long since I went down it.” And *down, down*, sang the harps. He spoke the language of the strings, and they responded like a distant choir in a high mountain mass.

“It is an old man who climbs to you now, Merlin. The trail is a beast to wrestle with. Yet you seem no older. I wonder when you will finally die. Do your years not sometimes argue that question with you?”

“Truthfully, Robert, I have considered it several times—but there were always too many other things to think about. I simply could not spare the time to die. If I did, I might never be able to think again.

“Up here, Robert, that furtive hope the valley men call faith becomes a questionable thing. Without a doubt, if I were surrounded by multitudes endlessly chanting, ‘There is a wise, kind God; surely we shall go on living after death,’ I might prepare myself for the life to come. But here, alone, halfway up the sky, I fear death would only interrupt my musing. The mountains are a poultice for a man’s abstract pain. Among them, he laughs far more often than he cries.”

“You know,” Robert said, “my mother, old Gwenliana, made a curious, final prophecy before she died. ‘This night the world ends,’ she said, ‘and there will be no more earth to walk upon.’”

“Robert, I think she spoke the truth. Her dying words were true, whatever her other auguries might have been. This gnawing thought visits me sometimes, and because of it, I am afraid to die—horribly afraid. If by my living I give life to you, and fresh existence to the fields and trees and all the long green world, it would be an unutterable crime to wipe them all out like a chalk drawing. I must not—at least, not yet.

“But enough of these foreboding things; they hold no laughter. You, Robert, have been too long in the valley of men. Your lips laugh, but there is no amusement in your heart. You arrange your lips like twigs over a trap, trying to conceal your pain from God. You once tried to laugh with all your soul, but you failed to make the satirist’s concession: buying the privilege of laughing at others with a little amusement at yourself.”

“I know that I am defeated, Merlin, and there seems to be no remedy. Victory, or luck, or whatever you wish to call it, appears hidden in a chosen few, like babies’ teeth hiding under the gums. In recent years, God has played a hard, calculating game with me. There are moments I think He cheated.”

Merlin spoke slowly:

“Once I played against a dear young god with goat’s feet, and that game was the reason I came here. But I made the great concession and signed it with sad laughter. Robert, did I not hear a long time ago that your mind was roving? William stopped by and claimed you had gone insane. Did you not do reprehensible things in your rose garden?”

Robert smiled bitterly. “That was one of God’s tricks,” he said. “I will tell you how it happened. One day, while pulling dead leaves from my roses, I felt compelled to make a symbol. This is not so unusual—men often stand on hilltops with outstretched arms, or kneel in prayer and cross themselves. I plucked a bloom and tossed it into the air, letting the petals shower down around me. In that moment, the act seemed to gather up and express the entire story of my life in a single gesture. The sheer loveliness of white petals against black earth absorbed me, and I forgot my symbol altogether. I threw another, and another, until the ground was snowed in rose leaves. Suddenly, I looked up and saw a dozen men standing around, laughing at me. They were returning from church. ‘Hee!’ they sneered, ‘Robert has lost his mind. His sense is slipping away. Ho! He is a child again, throwing rose petals.’ It must be a crazed God who allows such a thing.”

Merlin shook with silent glee.

“Oh, Robert! Why blame the world for protecting itself against you? I think God and the world are one and the same to you. If there were ten people in the valley below who admired the look of rose leaves on the earth, you would simply be a very queer person—interesting, a bit of a curiosity. They would bring strangers to your house on Sunday afternoons to exhibit you. But since there are none, you are deemed a radical who must be locked up or hanged. A judgment of insanity is truly the hanging of a man’s mind. Once it is whispered that his brain wanders, nothing he says will ever matter to anyone again, except as an object of mockery.

“Do you not see, Robert? People have been so frequently hurt, trapped, and tortured by ideas and contraptions they did not understand, that they have come to believe anything beyond their comprehension is inherently vicious—something to be stamped out by the first passerby. They are only protecting themselves against the ghastly hurts that can come from little things grown up.”

“I know all that,” said Robert, “and I do not cry out against it. My great complaint is that the only possession I carry with me is a bag of losses. I am the sole owner of the memory of things I used to have. Perhaps it is for the best, for I seem to love them more now that they are gone. But I cannot understand how this fortune is born hidden only in a chosen few. My own son seizes and keeps every one of his desires, if the winds tell the truth.”

“You had a son, Robert; I remember now. I think I prophesied that he would rule some world or other if he did not grow up.”

“And so he does. News of him drifts out of the south on a light, inaccurate wind. Rumor has wings like bats. It is said he rules a wild race of pirates; that he has captured towns and pillaged cities. The English are elated, calling him a hero and a patriot—and so do I, sometimes. But I fear if I were a Spaniard, he would be nothing more than a successful robber. I have heard—though I do not want to believe it—that he has tortured prisoners.”

“So,” Merlin mused, “he has become the great man he thought he wanted to be. If this is true, then he is not a man at all. He is still a little boy demanding the moon. I suppose he is rather unhappy about it. Those who claim children are happy have simply forgotten their own childhoods. I wonder how long he can stave off manhood.

“Robert, have you seen those great black ants born with wings? They fly for a day or two, then shed their wings and drop to the earth to crawl for the rest of their lives. I wonder when your son will drop his wings. Is it not strange, Robert, how this crawling is revered among men—how children actually tear at their own wings so they might indulge in this magnificent crawling?”

“What makes boys grow to men?” Robert asked. “What circumstance rots out their wing roots?”

“A great many never have wings to begin with, and some tear them off themselves. Sometimes it is sudden; other times, very tedious. I do not know every circumstance, but mine was ridicule—a kind of self-ridicule. I loved a small girl in the valley. I suppose she was beautiful, and I hoped I was handsome. I wrote a song for her and called her the Bride of Orpheus. I rather fancied myself Orpheus back then. But she considered marriage to a deity a crime against nature. She lectured me. Every man, she insisted, owed it to something—his family, his community, or himself, I forget which—to make a success of himself. She was vague on the nature of success, but she made it abundantly clear that poetry was not its foundation. And she abhorred deities, especially pagan ones. There was another man, one with lands and houses, who was reassuringly human. Even in my old age, I think spitefully that he was deplorably human. So they were married, and ridicule gnawed off my wings.

“I paraded murder, suicide, and fields of glory through my mind to combat this aching ridicule. In my shame, I decided to lock my songs away from the world so no one would ever hear them again. But the world did not even notice I was gone. No little groups of people came pleading for my return—as I had promised the ridicule they would. My bitten wings dropped; I became a man and no longer wanted the moon. And when I tried to sing again, my voice had grown husky as a drover’s, and my songs were thick with forethought and planning.”

“I wonder how I grew,” Robert said. “I do not remember. Perhaps my youth went out of me sticking to coins—or perhaps it lives in those lands I used to dream of. But Henry is swimming in his dreams, and sometimes I am very jealous of him.

“Do you know, Merlin, something has always struck me as strange. My mother, Gwenliana, believed she had the second sight, and we humored her because it brought her such joy. On the night Henry went away, she cast a picture of his life. Merlin, nearly all her words have come true. Could these visions have come to her like a series of bright paintings? It is a strange, unlikely thing.”

“Perhaps she simply read his desire, Robert, and sensed its strength. I taught old Gwenliana many things pertaining to magic; she was very apt at reading signs—and faces.”

Old Robert rose to stretch. “Ah, well—I must be going. It takes a weary time for such an aged man to navigate the path. It will be night before I am home again. Ah, here comes William with his pick, an appendage he must have been born with. I will walk down a bit in his company and learn the ways of London. You must truly love words, Merlin, to produce so many of them; and I must truly love pain, to continually engender it against myself.

“And Merlin, I think you are a trickster and a fraud. Every time I leave you, I am convinced you have spoken mighty truths, yet upon reflection, I can never recall a single one. I think you work a subtle conjuring with that soft voice of yours, and with your harps.”

As he made his way down the path, the hanging harps crooned the Sorcerer’s Farewell after him.

## Chapter IV

Panama was a great, lovely city in 1670 when Henry Morgan decided on its destruction—a rich, strong fortress of a town, justly called the Cup of Gold. Nowhere else in the raw New World could compare with its beauty and wealth.

Over a century before, Balboa had reached the shores of a new ocean. Dressed in scoured armor, he waded into the Pacific until the gentle waters washed against his thighs. In a grand oration, he firmly addressed the sea, claiming all lands it touched for the Spanish crown. He demanded the water be tractable and loyal, for it was now the honored private lake of Castile and Aragon.

Behind Balboa, huddled on the shore, sat a small grass village of the Indians named Panama. In the native tongue, the word signified a place of good fishing. When the soldiers of Spain put the litter of huts to the torch and built a new town in its place, they kept the old name—Panama, which sounds like a song. Soon, the meaning justified itself, for out of this little settlement, the nets of Spain were flung in all four directions.

Pedrarias carried the nets north, enmeshing the cities of the ancient Mayan race. Through his fishing, he sent strangely wrought serpents, frightful idols, and tiny graven insects—all forged of solid gold—back to Panama. When no more ornaments remained to gather, when the temples were reduced to vacant stone boxes, Pedrarias threw Spain's net over the people themselves, driving them into the mines beneath the crack of his whips.

Pizarro sailed south with horses and armored men, and the powerful Inca nation fell before him. He slaughtered their rulers and ripped the life from their governmental structure. Diamonds, golden plates stripped from temple walls, heavy sun symbols, and ceremonial shields were all shipped back to Panama. Then, Pizarro forced the broken Inca people into the mines with whips.

A hundred captains led small bands of soldiers to the east and southeast, where the fierce Indians of Darien lived in trees and caves. There, the Spanish discovered nose rings, anklets, god-sticks, and eagle quills packed with gold dust. Everything was dumped into sacks and hauled by mule to Panama. When the graves had been thoroughly robbed of their ornaments, even the wild Indians were forced to dig the earth by the authority of the whips.

Spanish ships discovered small islands to the west, where pearls could be found in shallow bays if one only dived deep enough. Before long, the gentle folk of those islands were forced to leap into shark-infested waters, and heavy bags of pearls found their way to Panama.

All this endless toil, the exquisite craftsmanship of precious things, flowed at last into Panama. There, melting pots received the treasures like glowing gourmands, transforming delicate art into thick, crude logs of gold. Warehouses were piled high with these golden sticks, waiting for the treasure fleet to sail for Spain. Sometimes bars of silver were tiered up in the very streets for lack of warehouse room, safe from thievery only by their sheer weight.

Meanwhile, the city blossomed into a glorious thing. The stolen wealth of enslaved nations funded thousands of fine red-roofed cedar houses, complete with inset patios where rare, secret flowers bloomed. The colorful arts and comforts of old Europe flew westward at the call of golden lumps, beautifying the Panamanian estates.

The first Spaniards to invade the country had been cruel, grasping robbers, but they were also soldiers whom no bloody prospect could frighten. Small bands of them had captured the New World with little force beyond spiritual courage and raw brutality. But once the peoples of Nicaragua, Peru, and Darien had been reduced to gangs of whimpering slaves—when the immediate danger had passed—a different breed of men came to live in Panama. These were the merchants: ruthlessly decisive when legally wresting a farm from its owner or gouging outland colonists on the price of food, but fearful and cowardly at the mere rattle of steel.

The merchant class soon dominated the entire isthmus. The original soldiers either died or grew restless in the new security, marching away to fresh, dangerous frontiers. They left the battle of foodstuffs and extravagances to the traders, who doled out flour and wine in exchange for jewels and gold. The merchants colluded to fix exorbitant prices on necessities, and with the profits, they built rosy-tiled mansions. They dressed their wives in foreign silks and paraded through the streets followed by retinues of slaves.

A company of Genoese slave dealers arrived and built a massive warehouse for their merchandise. Inside, black men sat in tiered cages until they were dragged into the light to be prodded, felt over, and bargained for.

It was a lovely city. Two thousand grand cedar houses lined Panama's principal streets, while five thousand smaller dwellings housed clerks, messengers, and the King's paid soldiers further out. Clustering on the outskirts were countless thatched huts where the slaves were quartered. The town's center boasted six churches, two convents, and a towering cathedral, all equipped with solid gold services and vestments heavy with jewels. Already, two saints had lived and died in Panama—minor saints, perhaps, but important enough to make their bones quite valuable.

An entire district was dedicated to the King's houses, stables, and barracks. Here, one-tenth of all the land's produce was stored until the next plate fleet arrived, when it would be carried by donkey across the isthmus and loaded onto ships. Panama was single-handedly supporting the Spanish kingdom, funding the King’s new palaces and endless wars. Grateful for the ready money flowing into his treasury, the King elevated Panama to a seat of high dignity. It bore a proud title: The Very Noble and Very Loyal City of Panama. Its rank equaled that of Cordova and Seville, and its officials wore golden chains of office. The King even granted the city a resplendent coat of arms: a shield on a field of gold bearing two caravels and a handful of gray arrows, surrounded by the Lions and Castles of the twin Spanish kingdoms, with the north star of discovery blazing above. Truly, Panama was one of the greatest cities in the world.

At the heart of the Cup of Gold lay a broad, paved plaza featuring a raised central stand where music played in the evenings. As the melodies drifted over the square, the citizens strolled about, demonstrating their social standing by who they deigned to speak with; the merchant aristocracy nurtured a very tender pride. A man might haggle over the price of flour like a street peddler by day, but at night in the Plaza, he bowed stiffly to those less wealthy and imperceptibly fawned over those who were richer.

They had grown soft in their security. The city was considered impregnable. The sea protected one flank, and there were supposedly no foreign ships on the southern ocean anyway. The landward side was shielded by walls and a broad morass that could be flooded in times of danger, effectively turning the city into an island. Furthermore, any attacking army would have to hack its way through the dense isthmian jungle and wind through narrow passes easily defended by a handful of men. No one believed a sane leader would even dream of conquering Panama. So, when Campeche, Puerto Bello, and Maracaibo fell to the buccaneers, the merchants of the Cup of Gold simply shrugged and went about their business. It was unfortunate, of course—truly sad that their countrymen were so abused and robbed—but what did they expect? Their cities were on the wrong ocean. Panama need only think of these disturbances with mild pity. God was good, and business was—well, terrible; cash was scarce, and the farmers were hoarding their goods like thieves.

Don Juan Perez de Guzman was Governor of the Cup of Gold—a quiet nobleman whose life was utterly devoted to being a complete gentleman. He drilled his little army, frequently changed his elaborate uniforms, and meticulously arranged the marriages of his relatives. He had been a soldier his entire life; not a good campaigner, perhaps, but an undeniably gallant officer. The dispatches he wrote to his subordinates were magnificent. His phrasing in demanding the surrender of an Indian village was beyond reproach. And the people loved their Governor. He dressed immaculately; he was proud, yet gracefully condescending. They cheered him daily as he clattered down the street with a troop of cavalry at his back. If there were any whispers of attack, the dashing figure of Don Juan surely reassured the populace. After all, his blood was the noblest and his warehouses the richest in the city.

Thus they lived happily in Panama, retreating to green country estates during the hot days, and returning to the balls and receptions of the town when the rainy season arrived. This was the Cup of Gold when Henry Morgan resolved to destroy it.

—

One day, the news crept into Panama that the terrible Morgan was coming to conquer them. Initially, the rumor was met with amused disbelief, but as more messengers arrived, the city woke into frantic activity. The people rushed to the churches, confessed their sins, kissed holy relics, and then rushed home again. Hundreds of priests marched in processions, bearing the Host through the streets. The dark brotherhood fiercely whipped themselves, dragging heavy crosses about for all to see. Yet the broken walls remained unmended, and the rusty cannons were not replaced. Don Juan attended mass after mass, delivered speeches to the frenzied crowds, and suggested a grand procession of all the city's clergy.

Horrible rumors began to sprout: the buccaneers were not men at all, but monstrous beasts with crocodile heads and lions’ claws. Grave men debated these possibilities openly in the streets.

“The blessing of the day, Don Pedro.”

“The Virgin’s blessing, Don Guillermo.”

“What are your thoughts on these robbers?”

“Ah! Horrible, Don Guillermo; horrible. They say they are demons!”

“But do you think it is possible, as I have heard, that Morgan himself has three arms and wields a sword in each?”

“Who can say, my friend! The devil has even greater powers than these. Who can truly measure the limits of Evil? It is sacrilegious to even consider it.”

And later:

“You say you heard it from Don Guillermo? Surely a man of his wealth would not repeat questionable things.”

“I only repeat what he said—that Morgan fires bullets from his fingertips and breathes out sulphurous flames. Don Guillermo was absolutely certain of it.”

“I must tell my wife of this, Don Pedro.”

The tales swelled until the populace was driven half mad. Stories of rampant cruelty in other captured cities were recalled, and the merchants who had previously shrugged now turned pale at the memory. They could not believe it; yet they *had* to believe it, for the pirates were already marching on Chagres, and their explicit goal was the conquest and pillage of the Cup of Gold. Finally, under immense pressure, Don Juan tore himself away from the church long enough to dispatch five hundred soldiers to set an ambush on the isthmus road. A young officer requested an audience.

“Well, young man,” the Governor began, “what is your wish?”

“If we had bulls, sir—if we had great numbers of wild bulls,” the officer cried excitedly.

“Get them! Scour the whole country for bulls! Have the men gather a thousand of them! But what are we going to do with them?”

“We should stampede them into the enemy, sir.”

“A marvelous plan! The genius of an officer! Ah, my dear friend—a thousand bulls? I jested. Have them gather *ten* thousand of the wildest bulls.”

The Governor ordered out his soldiers—two thousand of the King’s troops—formally reviewed them, and then promptly returned to kneel in the Cathedral. Don Juan was not afraid of fighting, but, like any prudent general, he believed in strengthening secondary defenses. Besides, anything that cost as much as the masses he had commissioned must surely have some effect.

The initial, creeping rumor had grown into a monster. Quaking citizens began burying the silver plate from their houses. Churchmen threw chalices and candlesticks into cisterns for safekeeping, walling up their most precious relics in subterranean passages.

Balboa would have fortified the walls and flooded the approaches. Pizarro’s army would have been halfway across the isthmus by now, marching to meet the oncoming buccaneers head-on. But those brave times had passed. The merchants of Panama thought only of their possessions, their lives, and their souls—strictly in that order. It never occurred to them to belt on swords or toil at the crumbling walls. That was work for the King's soldiers, who were paid good money to protect the citizens. The Governor would surely see to the defense.

Don Juan had reviewed his troops; to his mind, that was all any reasonable general could be expected to do. The uniforms were completely proof against criticism, and his soldiers would have performed with credit on any parade ground in Europe. Meanwhile, one more mass certainly wouldn't hurt matters.

### I

While the buccaneers were throwing away the spoils of plundered Maracaibo, Henry Morgan plunged into plans for his new conquest. It would require more fighting men than had ever been assembled. Captain Morgan's messengers went out to the four corners of the Spanish Main. His words found their way to Plymouth and Nieuw Amsterdam; his invitation to the great pillage reached even the wooded islands where men lived like apes.

“Every man will be rich if we succeed,” ran the message. “This will be the most powerful blow ever struck by the Brotherhood. We will carry terror to the innermost heart of Spain. Our fleet gathers on the south side of Tortuga by October.”

Soon, ships and men poured into the rendezvous: enormous new vessels with white sails and carven prows, ships bristling with brass cannons, and old, rotting hulks with bottoms so foul with weeds they moved through the water like logs. There came sloops, long canoes, and flatboats propelled by sweeps. Even rafts drifted to the meeting place beneath woven palm sails.

And the men—all the blustering Brotherhood of Tortuga; the old, expert pirates of Goaves; Frenchmen, Netherlanders, Englishmen, and Portuguese—the embattled outcasts of the world. Canoe-loads of slaves who had escaped the Spaniards paddled in, drawn to this expedition by a thirst for their former masters’ blood. The slaves were Caribs and Negroes and fevered whites. Little groups of hunters appeared on the beaches of jungle islands and took ship for Tortuga's southern shore.

Among the major ships were tall frigates and galleons captured in old engagements. When the time came for departure, Captain Morgan had thirty-seven ships under his command, alongside two thousand fighting men in addition to the mariners and boys. Anchored among the clustered shipping lay three slim, clean sloops from New England. They had not come to fight, but to trade—powder for plunder, whisky for gold. Powder and whisky were, after all, the two great engines of war. And besides, these Plymouth men would buy old, useless ships for the iron and cordage they contained.

Captain Morgan had sent hunters into the woods to shoot cattle, and ships to the mainland to steal grain. When they returned, the fleet was provisioned for a voyage.

Of all this polyglot press of men who had come at the call of conquest, no one save Coeur de Gris and Henry Morgan knew where that conquest was to be. No one dreamed where they would be sailing or whom they would fight at the journey’s end. The army of brave thieves had flocked to Morgan's name, thirstily confident in his promise of unlimited plunder.

Henry Morgan had not dared to reveal his destination. Potent though his name was, the buccaneers would have recoiled from such an impregnable objective. If given time to think of Panama, they would flee in dread, for stories of the power and protection of the Cup of Gold had circulated through all their islands for over half a century. Panama was a cloud city, an eerie, half-unearthly place, armed with lightning. Of course, there were those who believed its streets were paved with golden cobbles, and certain church windows carved from single emeralds. These legends would draw them on, provided they had no time to dwell upon the hazards.

When the ships had been careened and scraped, the sails mended, the cannons scoured and tested, and the holds filled with provisions, Henry Morgan called a meeting of his captains to sign solemn articles and divide the fleet into commands.

Thirty captains who had pledged their ships to the enterprise gathered in the Admiral's oaken cabin. Morgan's frigate was a fine Spanish man-o’-war, commanded by a Duke before it fell into pirate hands. The cabin resembled a large drawing-room, its dark oak panels sloping slightly inward at the top. Across the ceiling were heavy beams carved with vines and delicate, slim leaves. On one wall had been the painted arms of Spain, but a dagger had scraped and scratched them nearly out of sight.

Captain Morgan sat behind a broad table, each of its legs a curiously carved lion, and encircling him on stools were the thirty leaders of his fleet and army. They waited impatiently for his word.

There was the short, serious Captain Sawkins, whose eyes burned with the fervor of Puritanism. He justified his murders with Scripture and offered prayers of thanksgiving from a gun carriage after a successful rape.

Black Grippo was there, an old man now, sagging under the weight of his accumulated infamies. He had come, finally, to regard his God as a patient policeman whom one might possibly outwit. Lately, he had reasoned that he might flee his sins through a general confession and reconciliation with his mother church. This he intended to do as soon as one more expedition provided him with a golden candlestick to bear to the confessing priest by way of a peace offering.

Holbert and Tegna, Sullivan and Meyther, sat on stools surrounding Morgan. In a dark corner sat two men the entire Brotherhood knew to be inseparable. They were called simply The Burgundian and The Other Burgundian. The first was a little fat man with a face like a bloated red sun. He was nervous and excitable; the slightest public attention threw him into a fit of embarrassment. When addressed, his face darkened further, and he gave the impression of a beetle frantically seeking a stone to hide beneath. His companion, The Other Burgundian, was his defender and guide. The Other Burgundian was taller and more powerfully made, although his left arm was gone at the elbow. They were always seen together, walking or sitting in quiet companionship. They seldom spoke, but the good arm of The Other Burgundian was always draped about the shoulders of his dumpy friend in a gesture of protection.

Morgan's voice was harsh and cold when he began. A deep silence fell over the room while he read the articles. A man who provided a ship would draw a specified rent; a carpenter with tools was to be paid a set wage; certain amounts would be set aside for the dependents of the slain. Then he came to the rewards: to the first man to sight an enemy; the first to kill a Spaniard; the first to breach the city. The articles were finished.

“Now, sign,” demanded Captain Morgan. The men shuffled to the table and inscribed their names or marks.

When they were seated again, Sawkins spoke.

“The rewards are four times as great as custom demands. Why is that?” His Puritan training made him abhor waste.

“The men will need bravery,” Henry Morgan said calmly. “They will need urging—for we go to Panama.”

“Panama!” The answer was almost a groan.

“Yes, Panama. You have signed articles—and I hang deserters. Look to the spirits of your men. You know something of the wealth of Panama—enough to whet their appetites; and I know the dangers well enough to be sure they are surmountable.”

“But—Panama—” Sawkins began.

“I hang deserters,” Morgan repeated, and turned on his heel, leaving the cabin. Coeur de Gris remained to listen; he would report the temper of the men.

A long silence followed. Every man was recalling the things he had heard about Panama.

“It is dangerous,” said Sawkins, at last. “Dangerous, but goodly rich. And the captain swore he knew the plan of the city and all the hazards of the fight.”

These words brought sudden reassurance. If Captain Morgan knew, then they need not fear. Morgan was infallible. The room quickly filled with nervous conversation.

“Money? They walk on it. I have heard that the Cathedral—”
“But the jungle is impassable.”
“They have good wine in Panama. I tasted some that came from there.”

And suddenly, every mind turned to the Red Saint.

“Why, that woman is there—La Santa Roja.”
“Yes, that is right. She is there. Who do you suppose will get her?”
“The captain’s not a man for women at all. I think it will be Coeur de Gris, here. He is the most favored among us.”
“Well enough. Coeur de Gris is fated to die on the poniard of some man’s jealousy. I wouldn't mind killing him, because if I did not, someone else would. No, it might be my dagger.”
“What would you do with a woman like that? A rope’s end wouldn't quite do, I suspect.”
“Well, to tell the truth, I have always found those fat doubloons the most perfect instruments of rape. They glitter so.”
“No, no. But see this: nearly all women will repurchase their diamonds with their virtue. Once you possess the latter, it is an easy thing to reclaim the former.”

“What does old One-arm say about it—The Other Burgundian? Hey! Will you be taking the Red Saint for your fat friend there?”

The Other Burgundian bowed.

“There would be no need,” he said. “My friend is very capable. Why, I could tell a tale—” He turned to The Burgundian. “Have I your permission, Emil?”

The Burgundian seemed to be trying to melt into the wall, but he managed a nod.

“Then I will tell you gentlemen a story,” The Other Burgundian began. “There were four friends in Burgundy; three who squeezed a little sour milk from the dugs of art, and one who had possessions. Also, there was a lovely girl in Burgundy; beautiful, accomplished, a veritable Circe, the loveliest in the province. And the four friends all fell in love with this exquisite creature.

“Each gave her the gifts he held most dear. The first folded his soul into a sonnet and laid it at her feet. The second filled a viol's music with her name; and I—the third, I mean—painted the rosy image of her face. Thus did we artists bid for her in all friendliness to one another. But the last of the four was the true artist. He was quiet; he was subtle. What an actor! He won her with a superb gesture. He opened his hand—so—and there, on the cushion of his palm, lay a laughing rose pearl. They were married.

“Now, soon after this marriage, Delphine gave evidence of greater virtues than anyone had suspected. Not only was this paragon a perfect wife, but she was also a discreet and delightful mistress—not to one, but to all three—of the husband’s friends. And Emil, the husband, did not mind. He loved his friends. Why not? They were his true friends, but poor.

“Ah, where is a force so blind, so idiotic, as public opinion! In this instance, it birthed two deaths and one banishment. This hydra of Public Opinion—consider to yourselves what it did! It forced Emil to challenge his three friends. Even then, all might have ended with a kiss, an embrace—‘my honor is whole again, dear friend’—had it not been for Emil’s deplorable habit of leaving his rapier point in putrefying meat. Two of the men died, and I lost my arm.

“Now, here again comes this Public Opinion, like a blundering, powerful ox. Having forced the duels, it forced the victor out of France. Here is Emil, beside me—lover, swordsman, artist, landowner. This Public Opinion—but I have strayed from the tale in my hatred of this force. What I wanted to tell you is that Emil asks no consideration, no quarter at all. I know it appears as though a swarm of hungry ants has feasted upon his spirit; but let great beauty be placed before him, let the Red Saint be mirrored in those eyes, and you shall see and remember what I say. He is quiet; he is subtle; he is an artist. Where other men cry ‘Virility! Force! Rape!’—Emil carries a rose pearl in his pocket as an aphrodisiac.”

### II

An army of flatboats floated on the River Chagres, each taxed to the limit of its buoyancy by the men of the Free Brotherhood. There were Frenchmen in striped nightcaps and full, loose pantaloons; men who had sailed out of St. Malo or Calais once, and now had no fatherland to return to. Cockneys filled some of the barges—mostly dirty men with black teeth and the look of petty thievery about them. Dour, silent Zeerovers from Holland sat lumpishly in their boats, gazing with the dull eyes of gourmands along the course of the Chagres.

Caribs and Cimarones poled the heavy, square barges along—joyfully fierce men who loved war so well they could be persuaded to bend their sleek brown shoulders to labor if the reward were blood. One section of this piratical parade comprised Negroes lately escaped from Spanish servitude. Red bandoliers crossed like wounds on their naked breasts. Their leader, a huge buck with a face like a ferocious black moose, wore nothing save a broad yellow belt and a cavalier hat, its plume hanging limply to curl under his glistening black chin.

The long line of boats edged upstream. The English shouted tuneless chanteys, swaying their bodies to keep the rhythm; the French sang softly of little loves they might have had; and the Cimarones and blacks chattered endless monologues directed at no one in particular.

The Chagres twisted ahead in loops and tremendous horseshoe turns. Its yellow water, like a frightened, leprous woman, timidly caressed the hulls. On this river, you might pole your boat all day, and at night make camp not half a mile in a straight line from your starting place. It was a sluggish, apathetic river of many shallows, where bright sand glittered in the sun. The Chagres was a dilettante in the eternal, understood business of rivers: getting to the ocean with as little bother and effort as possible. It dreamed its way across the country, seemingly reluctant to lose its lazy individuality in the worried sea.

Eventually, the boats reached a land where thick jungle rolled to the river’s edge and stopped in a curving crest, like a frozen green wave. Spotted tigers cruised through the trees, watching the men with a sad curiosity. Now and then a great snake slipped from the warm log where it had been dozing in the sun and floated in the water, rearing its head to observe this unheard-of procession. Whole clans of excited monkeys dashed among the vines, pretending to hate the disturbance. They howled their indignation, hurling leaves and twigs at the boats. Fourteen hundred outlandish beings had invaded sacred Mother Jungle; the mangiest monkey on earth had at least his right of protest.

The day’s heat arrived like a breath of fever, heavy and bewildering. The songs from the barges thickened and died as though hot blankets had been thrown over the men. The buccaneers sat lifelessly on their benches, while the straining Indians poled on with a steady, swinging motion. Muscles slipped along their fine arms, coiling and uncoiling about their shoulders like restless serpents. Within their brooding brains played a reverie of slaughter—a delightful blood-dream. “On!” said their brains. “On! Ugh! The battle is two strides nearer. On! On! Ugh! Panama; the savannas of blood are two strides nearer.” The long line of boats writhed upriver like a tremendous jointed snake.

The long, ardent day faded toward evening, and no humans had been seen along the riverbanks. This was a serious matter, for there was no food on the barges. There was no room for it. Every inch was needed for men and weapons; as it was, the water washed over the low decks of the artillery rafts. It was well known that many plantations bordered the river, where a hungry army might refresh itself, and this knowledge had sent the pirates foodless toward Panama. All day they had watched for plantations and had seen nothing but the green, tangled jungle.

By evening, the lead boat came abreast of a stick landing. A languid coil of smoke rose from behind a row of planted trees. With loud cries of joy, the buccaneers leaped from their boats and waded ashore. But there were only curses and despair; the buildings were burned and deserted. The thin smoke drifted from the blackened heap of a granary, where not a single grain remained for the men to eat. Deep tracks led off into the wet jungle, showing where the cattle had been driven away, but the tracks were two days old.

The hungry men returned to their boats. Ah, well; they must go hungry today. Hunger was a part of war, a matter to be expected and endured. Tomorrow, surely, they would come upon houses where cold, delicious wine was stored; corrals where fat cows nodded stupidly, waiting to be slaughtered. A buccaneer—a true buccaneer—would sell his life for a cup of sour wine or a bit of conversation with one of the brown women of half-Spain. These were the joys of life, and a fair thing it was if a man was stabbed before he finished his drink or his conversation. But hunger—well, tomorrow there would surely be food.

But the sun rose again, a white, fevered ulcer in the sky. There was the river of mad turnings, and along its banks lay deserted farms, and no food at all. News of this invasion had swept ahead of them like an appalling message of pestilence. No man or beast remained to greet the buccaneers.

On the third day they found a number of tough, green cowhides, beating them between stones to soften them for eating. Some of the men had already eaten half their belts. Once, a little burned maize was discovered in a still-smoldering granary, and several pirates died in agony from gorging on it.

The men hunted in the jungle, searching the trees for any living thing that might be eaten. Even the cats and monkeys seemed in league with Spain. The jungle was silent and creatureless now. No spark of life was left save the flying insects. Now and then a snake was caught and roasted, its captor sullenly guarding his supper. A few mice fell into the pirates’ hands, but these were bolted on the spot for fear of thievery.

After four days of travel, the river grew too shallow for the boats. The cannons were brought ashore to be dragged by hand along a narrow path. The buccaneers straggled out in an unkempt column, while ahead of them a swarm of busy Indians, drawing energy from their sanguinary dream, hacked and slashed a trail through the jungle with heavy knives. A few small groups of fleeing Spaniards were seen, and now and again bands of Spanish Indians flushed from the thickets like coveys of frightened quail, but no enemy paused long enough to give battle. Once, beside the trail, a prepared ambush was discovered: a wall of earth and the ashes of many campfires. It was deserted. Terror had seized the soldiers sent to fight, and they had fled.

The men dragged themselves nearer and nearer to Panama. Their enthusiasm for conquest was gone; they cursed their leader for his failure to bring food, drawn onward only by the sheer force of Captain Morgan's example.

He had led them from the first, but now, at the head of the exhausted troops, Henry Morgan himself began to doubt whether he truly wished to go to Panama. He tried to remember the force that had set him on his way—the magnet of unseen beauty. La Santa Roja had faded in his imagination as his hunger grew. He could not clearly remember his desire. But even if this desire deserted him utterly, he had to go on. One failure, one moment of indecision, would scatter his successes like pigeons.

Coeur de Gris was beside him as he had been from the beginning—a haggard Coeur de Gris now, lurching a little as he walked. Captain Morgan looked at his lieutenant with pity and pride. He saw eyes like shallow crystal, harboring a wild light of approaching madness. Morgan felt less lonely with the young man by his side. He knew Coeur de Gris had grown to be a part of him.

The sun’s heat fell from the heavens like a burning rain. It struck the ground and slowly rose again, burdened with dampness and the nauseating odor of rotting leaves and roots. Once, the heat drove Coeur de Gris to his knees, but he immediately rose to trudge onward. Morgan saw his staggering walk and glanced at the trail ahead with indecision.

“Perhaps we should rest here,” he said. “The men are exhausted.”

“But no. We must go on,” Coeur de Gris replied. “If we stop here, the men will only be weaker when we start again.”

Morgan mused, “I wonder why you are so avid for my mission. You press forward when even I begin to doubt myself. What is it that you expect to find in Panama, Coeur de Gris?”

“I expect to find nothing,” the young man said. “Are you trying to trap me into a statement of disloyalty? I know the prize is yours before we arrive. I admit it, sir. But you see, I am like a great, round stone set in motion down a hill—that is all the reason I have for going to Panama. You, sir, set me in motion.”

“It is strange that I should so want Panama,” Henry said.

The lieutenant turned his flushed face on him in anger.

“You do not want Panama. It is the woman you want, not Panama.” His voice was as bitter as his words, and he was pressing his palms against his temples.

“It is true,” the captain murmured. “It is true that I want the woman; but that is stranger still.”

“Strange?” Wild resentment flared in Coeur de Gris. He shouted, “Strange? Why is it strange to lust after a woman known to be beautiful? Would you call each one of these men strange, or every male thing on earth strange? Or are you endowed with a godlike lust? Do you bear the body of a Titan? Strange! Yes, surely, my Captain; copulation and its contemplation are things completely unique among men!”

Henry Morgan was bewildered, but also a little terrified. He seemed to have witnessed the walking of a loathsome, unbelievable ghost. Could it be that these men felt as he did?

“But I think there is more than lust,” he said. “You cannot understand my yearning. It is as though I strove for some undreamed-of peace. This woman is the harbor of all my questing. I do not think of her as a female thing with arms and breasts, but as a moment of peace after turmoil, a perfume after rancid filth. Yes, it is strange to me. When I consider the years that are gone, I am bewildered at my own activity. I went to mighty trouble for silly, golden things. I did not know the secret which makes the earth a huge chameleon. My little wars seem the scrambling of a stranger, a person who did not know how to make the world change color. I mourned, in the old time, when each satisfaction died in my arms. Is it any wonder they all died? I did not know the secret. No, you cannot understand my yearning.”

Coeur de Gris gripped his aching temples. “I do not understand!” he cried scornfully. “Do you think I do not understand? I know; to your mind, your feelings are new things, discoveries of fresh importance. Your failures are unprecedented. This gigantic conceit will not allow you to believe that this Cockney behind you—yes, he who sometimes rolls on the ground in fits—might have the same hopes and despairs as yourself. You cannot believe that these men feel as deeply as you do. I suppose it would surpass your wildest thought if I should say I want the woman as much as you do, or that I could speak sweet sentences to La Santa Roja, perhaps, better than you could.”

Captain Morgan flushed under the lash of words. He did not believe it. It was monstrous to think that these men could feel as he did. Such a comparison made him feel, somehow, unworthy.

“You wonder why I say these things?” Coeur de Gris continued. “I will tell you. The pain has made me mad, and I am going to die.” He walked on silently for a little distance, then suddenly screamed and fell heavily to the ground.

For a full minute, Captain Morgan looked at him. Then a great, harsh wave seemed to break forth in his chest. He knew in that minute how much he had come to love the young lieutenant; he knew he could not bear to lose him. He dropped to his knees beside the silent figure.

“Water!” he cried to the nearest buccaneer, and when the fellow merely stared: “Water! Bring water—water!” His hand jerked hysterically at a pistol in his belt. They brought him water in a hat. All the pirates saw their cold captain kneeling on the ground, stroking the damp, shining hair of Coeur de Gris.

The young man’s eyes opened slowly, and he tried to rise.

“I am sorry, sir. The pain in my head, you know—the sun sucked out my wits. But you must get up, sir! The men will lose respect for you if they see you kneeling here.”

“Lie still, boy! Lie quietly! You must not move yet. I am afraid. For a moment I thought you were dead, and all the world shriveled. Lie quietly! Now I am glad. You must not move. We will take the Cup of Gold together, and it shall be a chalice of two handles.” He lifted Coeur de Gris and carried him to the shade of a huge tree. The buccaneers rested on the ground while the lieutenant regained his strength.

Coeur de Gris leaned back against the tree, smiling at the captain with a queer, womanish affection.

“Am I like the Cockney?” Henry Morgan asked a little wistfully. “Like the Cockney with fits?”

Coeur de Gris laughed.

“You know nothing at all about the man. You might be proud to resemble him. I will tell you, for I know that to you he is only a figure of wood to take orders. The man’s name is Jones. All his life he has wanted to be a preacher of the Gospel. He thought his fits were visitations of the Holy Ghost, testing him for some divine mission. Once, he stood on a corner and spoke to the people of London, and the watch came upon him as he talked. The law took him for a vagrant and shipped him to the islands.

“This Jones, after his term was done, became a pirate to keep from starving. There was a division of spoil from a raid, and to his share fell a woman slave, a Spaniard with Negro blood. He married her to save her reputation. He did not know how little was left to save. You see, sir, his wife is a Catholic. She will not let him read the Bible when he is at home. And do you know, sir, he truly believes that thievish circumstance has robbed him of success—not success as you and I know it, but the success that comes of God’s especial favor. He imagines he might have been a Protestant Savonarola.”

“But his fits—” said Henry Morgan. “His horrible fits—I have seen them.”

Again the young man laughed.

“The fits? Ah, the fits are a gift—an heirloom.”

“And you think he feels?”

“Yes, perhaps he does. Remember, he married her to save her name, and kept her with him when he found what that name was. And you will see him bashfully claim a crucifix at the division of spoil. He will take her a crucifix from Panama. Think, man! He is a Separatist from the church. He abhors crucifixes!”

### III

The buccaneers drove themselves onward toward Panama. They had survived on leather and bitter jungle roots, on rodents, snakes, and monkeys. Their faces were hollowed into shallow cups under stark cheekbones; their eyes glittered with fever. Now that their initial fervor had burned away, they were dragged onward by a blind faith in their captain’s infallibility. Morgan could not fail because he never had. Surely he possessed a plan to put the gold of the New World in their pockets. And the word “gold,” though it had lost its tether to reality, still held more power than the word “hunger.”

On the eighth morning, a scout came to Captain Morgan.

“The way is blocked, sir. They’ve thrown up a small earthwork ahead of us and mounted cannons.”

At a command, the head of the wriggling column swung left and began to gnaw its way through the dense underbrush. In the evening they crested a small, round hill, and there below them lay Panama, laved in the golden light of the western sun. Each man searched his neighbor’s face to ensure this was not some shared, feverish hallucination.

One pirate stepped to the hill’s edge. He stood perfectly still, then let out a crazed shout, and his companions saw him tearing down the slope, dragging his sword behind him as he ran. A herd of cattle grazed in the hollow below, left behind by some blundering Spaniard. In an instant, all fourteen hundred men were stampeding down the hill. They slaughtered the cows with their swords, lunging and slashing at the terrified animals. Soon, thick red drops of blood were spotting the shirts and dripping down the beards of the famished men. That night, they gorged themselves into a heavy, meat-drunk unconsciousness.

Under the cover of darkness, pirate scouts ranged over the plain like werewolves, slipping close to the walls to count the soldiers marshaled before the town.

Early the next morning, Captain Morgan roused his men and gathered them to issue orders for the day’s fight. Henry Morgan had come to know the buccaneering soul intimately. He reached into the minds of his men and molded them for battle. First, he spoke to their fears.

“It is a nine days’ journey back to the river mouth where the ships lie—nine days, with no food at all. You could not reach the ships even if you turned and ran. But here is Panama. While you slept like hogs, our scouts were busy. Before this city, four thousand soldiers are drawn up, flanked by wings of cavalry. These are not mere countrymen with guns and knives, but drilled soldiers in red coats. And that is not all. There are bulls to be loosed against you—against you, cattle hunters.” A grim laugh followed his words. Many of these men had lived in the jungle, making their livelihood by hunting wild cattle.

Next, the captain stoked their avarice:

“Gold and jewels past all hope of counting lie waiting in the city. Every man of you will be rich if we succeed.”

He prodded their hunger:

“Think of the roasted meats, the cool barrels of wine in the cellars, the spiced puddings. Imagine them!”

He inflamed their lust:

“There are slave women in the city, and thousands of others, God knows! Your only difficulty will be choosing from the multitude that will fall to us. These are not grubby field women, but great ladies who sleep in silken beds. How will your rough skins feel in beds like those, do you suppose?”

And finally, because he knew them better than they knew themselves, he raised the banner of their vanity.

“The names of those who fight today will climb the stairs of history. This is no mere pillage; it is glorious war. Imagine the people of Tortuga pointing to you in the streets, saying, ‘That man fought at Panama. That man is a hero, and rich.’ Think how the women of Goaves will flock to you when you return. There is the Cup of Gold before you. Will you turn your backs? Many will die in the field today, but those who remain will carry golden Panama home in their pockets.”

A hoarse cheer arose. The French blew kisses to Henry Morgan; the Caribs chattered and rolled their dark eyes. The gourmand Zeerovers stared with dull, heavy hunger at the white city.

“One thing more,” the captain added. “If I know these Spanish captains, their troops will be drawn up in a long line. They love to make as grand a show as possible. Your orders are to fire at their center—all of you. When that center weakens, charge and split them.”

They moved out onto the plain, a dense and ragged cloud of men. Two hundred marksmen advanced in the vanguard, while the rest massed behind them.

Meanwhile, Don Juan, the Governor of Panama, stood proudly before his neat army—a long line of foot soldiers arranged in crisp companies of two files. He surveyed the rough, swarming formation of the enemy with open contempt. Almost gaily, he signaled for the first advance.

The Spanish cavalry swung out, wheeling and whirling across the plain in perfect order. Now they formed a V, now a hollow square. Moving at a brisk trot, they executed the intricate evolutions of a military review, forming flawless triangles and T’s. In one synchronized moment, every sword flashed in the sunlight, vanished with a twist of the wrist, and then flashed again. Don Juan groaned aloud in admiration.

“Look at them, my friends! Look at Rodriguez, my beloved captain. Ah, Rodriguez, is it really I who taught you such grace? Can this be the same Rodriguez I held in my arms so little time ago? He was a baby then, but today he is a man, a hero. See the line, the sureness, the absolute precision! See Rodriguez with his troop, my friends. How could those beasts of buccaneers ever overcome horsemen like mine?”

Rodriguez, riding at the head of his troop, seemed almost to hear the Governor’s praise. His shoulders stiffened. Rising in his stirrups, he signaled the charge. The bugles sang out excitedly, and hooves began to roar with a hollow, rolling thunder over the turf. Their advance was a sweeping red wave with a crest of silver steel. Rodriguez turned in his saddle, looking proudly back at the hurtling troop. They followed his lead as though they were the many limbs of a single great body, governed solely by his mind. Every saber was leveled tight along a horse’s neck. Rodriguez turned once more to gaze upon his lovely Panama before the shock of impact. 

And then the entire troop rode headlong into a marsh. 

They knew the bog was there, but in the blinding enthusiasm of the moment, caught up in the excitement of their intricate maneuvers, they had completely forgotten it. In a matter of seconds, the proud cavalry of Panama was reduced to a broken jumble of floundering men and screaming beasts. They were trapped like flies on green flypaper.

Don Juan stared dazedly at the writhing, tangled mass out on the plain. Then he burst into tears, weeping like a child who has just seen his brightest toy broken in the road. The Governor did not know what to do. His brain was heavy, clouded with a sudden red sorrow. Numbly, he turned around and started plodding back toward the city. He would go and hear a mass in the Cathedral, he thought.

The Spanish staff, meanwhile, had grown frantic. Men in red and gold uniforms rushed about in every direction, each officer shouting conflicting commands at the top of his lungs. Finally, the young lieutenant who had brought up the cattle managed to make himself heard.

“Turn loose the bulls! The bulls!” he cried, over and over, until the others took up the chant. The Indians handling the bulls tore out the nose rings and began prodding the massive beasts forward with their goads. Slowly, the herd moved out across the plain. Then one great red monster broke into a lumbering run, and within moments, the entire band was charging.

“They will trample these robbers into the grass,” a Spanish officer noted sagely. “Where they pass, we shall find buttons, pieces of broken weapons, and nothing more on the bloody ground.”

The bulls galloped toward the ragged line of buccaneers. Suddenly, the two hundred vanguard marksmen dropped to one knee and fired—shooting swiftly and cleanly, like men hunting game. A kicking, bellowing wall of lead seemed to rise up directly in the path of the running animals. The beasts that were not crippled halted in their tracks. They sniffed the sudden blood, milled in confusion, and then stampeded in blind terror back into the Spanish ranks. The Spanish officer had been right: where the bulls passed, nothing remained but buttons, broken weapons, and bloody turf.

Using the chaos of the stampede, the buccaneers charged. They dashed into the gaping hole the bulls had torn in the lines, driving the splintered defenders to the left and right. There were a few defiant war cries from the Spanish, but these were traditional continental soldiers. They could not comprehend this savage, brawling style of warfare, where terrible vagrants laughed aloud while butchering men with both hands. The men of Spain held their ground for a little while, but soon their hearts broke beneath their fine red coats, and they broke and ran for the jungle. Small knots of buccaneers pursued them, spitting those who fell exhausted in the dirt. Before long, the defending troops were utterly scattered. Some climbed into the canopy to hide among the leaves; others fled so deeply into the mountains they were never seen again. The Cup of Gold lay helpless before Henry Morgan.

A crowd of shouting men poured through the undefended gates and surged up the broad main street. At intersecting alleys, sections of the mob changed course, splintering off like a river flowing backward into its tributaries. Now and then, a small party would detach from the main body and descend upon one of the imposing houses. There would be a series of heavy kicks, a violent rush, and the door would fold inward like the cover of an enormous book. The pirates would crowd through the entrance—a flurry of shouts, a scream or two, then silence. 

From an upper window, an old woman leaned out to study the invaders with intense curiosity. Soon, sharp disappointment showed on her face.

“Ho!” she screamed to a neighbor across the way. “Would you look at this! These thieves look just like our own Spaniards. They aren’t devils at all—they’re only men.” She seemed to actively resent their humanity, withdrawing her head as though renouncing them entirely for the crime of being ordinary flesh and blood.

In the late afternoon, a fire broke out. Tall flames lanced into the sky. A section caught, then an entire street; soon, half the city was burning.

Henry Morgan strode to the Palace of the Governor to establish his quarters. There, standing in the grand doorway, was Don Juan Perez de Guzman, a naked rapier trembling in his hand.

“I am the Governor,” he said brokenly. “My people looked to me to defend them against this scourge. I have failed them—but perhaps I can still manage to kill you.”

Henry Morgan looked down at the ground. Something about the hysterical, tear-stained man unnerved him. “I did not set the fires,” he said quietly. “I believe some of your own slaves did that out of revenge.”

Don Juan stepped forward with his drawn rapier. “Defend yourself!” he cried.

Captain Morgan did not move.

The sword dropped clattering from the Governor’s hand. “I am a coward,” he wept. “A coward. Why did I not strike without speaking? Why did you not oppose me? Ah, I am a coward! I waited too long. I should never have spoken at all; I should have just driven my point into your throat. I wanted to die a moment ago—to die as atonement for my failure, and to take you with me as a peace offering to my conscience. Panama is gone, and I should be gone with it. I am like a finger that continues to twitch after the body has died. But I cannot die now. I haven’t the courage. Nor can I kill you. I see now that it was all pretense. Ah! If only I had acted quickly! If I had not spoken—” 

He turned and walked away toward the gate, toward the open country. Henry Morgan stood in silence, watching the broken man lurch drunkenly out of the burning city.

Black night fell. Nearly the entire city was engulfed, a blooming garden of red fire. The great tower of the Cathedral crashed down, throwing a heaven of swirling sparks into the night sky. Panama was dying in a bed of flames while the buccaneers murdered her people in the streets.

All night long, the captain sat in the palace’s audience chamber while his men hauled in the gathered plunder. They stacked golden bars on the floor like cordwood—bars so heavy it took two men to carry a single one. They built little mounds of jewels that looked like glittering haycocks. In the corner, the precious vestments of the church were heaped haphazardly, like the vibrant stock of a heavenly rag market.

Henry Morgan sat in a tall, high-backed chair carved with a tangle of serpents.

“Have you found La Santa Roja?”

“No, sir. The women of the town we've found are more like devils.”

Prisoners were dragged in to be put to the question, tortured with a thumbscrew taken from the Spanish dungeons.

“Kneel! Where is your wealth?” 

Silence. 

“Turn it, Joe.”

“Mercy! Mercy! I will lead you, I swear it. There is a cistern near my house—”

Another was dragged forward.

“Kneel! Your wealth? Turn it, Joe.”

“Stop, I will lead you!”

They were as regular, ruthless, and unfeeling as master slaughterers in an abattoir.

“Have you found La Santa Roja? I will hang every man of you if she is harmed.”

“No one has seen her, Captain. And the men, save for a handful, are roaring drunk.”

And so it went, all through the night. With each screaming confession of hidden wealth, the victim was led out by a party of searchers. Soon they would return bearing silver plates and golden cups, heavy jewels, and armfuls of colored silk. The glowing treasure in the Hall of Audience swelled into one enormous, dazzling heap.

And still, Captain Morgan asked, his voice growing weary:

“Have you found the Red Saint?”

“We have not found her, sir, but we are seeking and inquiring across the whole city. Perhaps in the daylight—”

“Where is Coeur de Gris?”

“I believe he is drunk, sir, but—” The man looked away from Henry Morgan.

“But what? What do you mean?” the captain demanded, sitting up.

“Nothing, Captain. I mean nothing at all. It is almost certain that he is merely drunk. Only, it takes such gallons of wine to put him under, and perhaps he has found a friend to pass the time with.”

“Did you see him with anyone?”

“Yes, sir, I saw him with a woman, and she was quite drunk. I could swear Coeur de Gris was drunk, too.”

“Did you think this woman might have been La Santa Roja?”

“Oh, no, sir; I am certain it was not her. She was only one of the women of the town, sir.”

Across the hall, there was a heavy clash of golden service being thrown onto the growing pile.

### IV

A yellow dawn crept from the little painted hills of Panama, growing bolder as it edged across the plain. The sun flared up from behind a peak, and its golden rays sought out their city. But Panama was dead, having suffered the quick decay of fire in one red night. Yet, as the sun is a fickle sphere, its seeking beams found joy in this new thing. They danced upon the smoking ruins, peered into upturned dead faces, raced along the cluttered streets, and fell headlong into broken patios. They came to the white Palace of the Governor, leaped through the windows of the audience chamber, and fingered the golden heap on the floor.

Henry Morgan was asleep in the serpent chair. His purple coat was caked with the mud of the plain. The gray-clad rapier lay on the floor beside him. He was alone in this room, for all the men who had helped to pick the city’s bones during the night had gone away to drink and to sleep.

It was a high, long room, walled with panels of polished cedar. The beams of the ceiling were as black and heavy as old iron. It had been a court of justice, a place of wedding feasts, the hall where ambassadors were toasted or murdered. One door opened onto the street; another, a broad, arched opening, led into a lovely garden around which the palace curled. In the middle of the garden a little marble whale spouted its steady stream into a pool. There were giant plants in red glazed pots, plants with purple leaves and flowers whose petals bore arrowheads or hearts or squares in cardinal. There were shrubs lined with harsh tracery in the mad colors of the jungle. A monkey no larger than a rabbit picked over the gravel of the path, looking for seeds.

On one of the stone seats of the garden sat a woman. She tore a yellow flower to pieces while singing fragments of a tender, silly song—“I would pluck the flower of the day for you, my love, where it grows in the dawning.” Her eyes were black, but opaque. They held the rich, sheening, shallow black of a dead fly’s wings, and sharp little lines bracketed them. She could draw up her lower lids so they shone with laughter, even as her mouth remained harsh and placid. Her skin was very pale, her hair straight and black as obsidian.

She glanced from the sun’s inquisitive light to the arched doorway of the Hall of Audience. Her singing stopped. She listened intently for a moment, then started the gentle song again. There was no sound save the distant crackling of fires which still burned among the palm slave-huts on the outskirts of the city. The little monkey came at a funny, crooked gallop along the path. He stopped in front of the woman and raised his black paws above his head as though in prayer.

The woman spoke softly to him. “You have learned your lesson well, Chico. Your teacher was a Castilian with a fearful mustache. I am well acquainted with him. Do you know, Chico, he wants what he considers my honor. He will not be satisfied until he has added my honor to his own, and then he will be almost boastful. You have no idea of the size and weight of his honor even as it is. But you would be satisfied with a nut, wouldn’t you, Chico?” She dropped a piece of her flower to the tiny beast, whereupon he seized it, put it in his mouth, and spat it out in disgust.

“Chico! Chico! You forget your teacher! That is all wrong. You will get no woman’s honor by it. Place the flower over your heart, kiss my hand with a loud snapping sound, and then stride off like a fierce sheep out searching for wolves.” She laughed and glanced again toward the doorway. Although there was no sound, she rose and walked quickly toward the Hall of Audience.

Henry Morgan turned slightly in his chair, allowing the sunlight to beat upon his eyelids. Suddenly, he sat up, blinking. He looked with satisfaction at the heap of treasure on the floor, then gazed full into the eyes of the woman standing under the broad arch.

“And have you ruined our poor city enough for your satisfaction?” she asked.

“I did not burn the city,” Henry said quickly. “Some of your Spanish slaves set the torch.” The words had been forced from him. He felt a sudden jolt of surprise. “Who are you?” he demanded.

She moved a step into the hall. “My name is Ysobel. It was said that you sought me.”

“Sought you?”

“Yes. I have been called La Santa Roja by certain young idiots,” she said.

“You—the Red Saint?”

He had prepared a picture in his mind: a young girl with blue, seraphic eyes that would drop before a mouse's stare. Her eyes did not waver. Under their soft black surfaces, they seemed to be laughing at him, mocking him. This woman’s face was sharp, almost hawk-like. She was beautiful, truly, but hers was the harsh, dangerous beauty of lightning. And her skin was stark white—not pink at all.

“You are the Red Saint?”

He was staggered by this subversion of his expectations. But, his mind argued, twelve hundred men and more had broken their way through the jungle, had dashed upon the city like a brutal wave. Hundreds of humans had died in the agony of wounds, hundreds more were crippled; the Cup of Gold was a ruin. And all these things had been done so that Henry Morgan might take La Santa Roja. With all this preparation, it must be certain that he loved her. He would not have come if he had not loved her. Whatever the shock of her appearance, he could not circumvent the logic: he must love her. Always he had thought of the “Saint” in her name, and now he perceived the irony of the adjective. But a queer feeling was seeping into him—no logical feeling at all. He remembered such sensations from a time long gone; he was drawn to, yet repelled by, this woman, and he felt her power to embarrass him. Morgan closed his eyes, and the phantom of a slender girl with golden hair stood in the darkness of his brain.

“You are like Elizabeth,” he said, in the dull monotone of one dreaming. “You are similar, and yet there is no likeness. Perhaps you have mastered the power she was only just learning to wield. I think I love you, but I do not know. I am not sure.”

When he opened his eyes, there stood a real woman before him, not the wraithlike Elizabeth. And she was gazing at him with curiosity, and perhaps, he thought, with some affection. It was queer that she had come to him when no one had forced her. She must be fascinated. He reached into his memory for the speeches he had composed on his way across the isthmus.

“You must marry me, Elizabeth—Ysobel. I think I love you, Ysobel. You must come away with me and live with me and be my wife, under the protection of my name and of my hand.”

“But I am already married,” she interposed; “quite satisfactorily married.”

He had even foreseen this. During the nights of the march, he had planned this campaign as carefully as he might have planned a battle.

“But is it right that two, meeting and flaming with white fire, should part for stark eternity, should trudge off into bleak infinity? That each of these two should bear the black embers of a flame that has not burned itself to death? Is there anything under heaven to forbid us this burning? Heaven has provided the deathless oil; each of us carries a little torch for the other. Ah, Ysobel—deny it, or shrink from the intruding knowledge if you will. You would vibrate to my touch like the fine wood of an old violin.

“You are afraid, I think. There is in your mind a burrowing apprehension of the world; the prying world, the spiteful world. But do not be afraid, for I say to you that this world is a blind, doddering worm, knowing three passions only—jealousy, curiosity, and hate. It is easy to defeat the worm, so long as you make the heart a universe unto itself. The worm, having no heart, cannot conceive of one's workings. It lies confounded by the stars of this new system.

“Why do I tell you these things, Ysobel—knowing you will understand them? You must understand them. Perhaps I know by the dark, sweet music of your eyes. Perhaps I can read the throbbing heartbeats on your lips. Your beating heart is a little drum urging me to battle with your fears. Your lips are like twin petals of a red hibiscus.

“And if I find you lovely, am I to be frightened by a dull circumstance? May I not speak my thoughts to you whom it most concerns next to myself? Let us not part bearing the black embers of a flame that has not burned itself to death.”

When he began to speak, she listened carefully, and a flicker of pain crossed her face. But when he finished, there was only amusement in her eyes—that, and a lurking ridicule beneath their surfaces. Ysobel laughed softly.

“You forget only one thing, sir,” she said. “I do not burn. I wonder if I shall ever burn again. You do not carry a torch for me—though I hoped you did. I came this morning to see if you did. And I have heard your words so very often in Paris and Cordova. I am tired of these words that never change. Is there some book with which aspiring lovers instruct themselves? The Spanish men say the exact same things, but their gestures are more practiced, and so a little more convincing. You have much to learn.”

She fell silent. Henry stared at the floor. His amazement had raised a fog of dullness in his brain.

“I took Panama for you,” he said plaintively.

“Ah—yesterday I hoped you had. Yesterday I dreamed you had, but today—I am sorry.” She spoke softly, with a profound sadness.

“When I heard of you and your blustering up and down the ocean, I thought of you, somehow, as the one realist in a world of vacillation. I dreamed that you would come to me one day, armed with a transcendent, silent lust, and force my body with brutality. I craved a wordless, reasonless brutality. The long thought of it bore me up when I was paraded by my husband. He did not love me. He was flattered by the thought that I loved him. It gave him importance and charm in his own eyes, neither of which he possessed. He would take me through the streets and his eyes would say, ‘See what I have married! No ordinary man could marry such a woman; but then, I am not an ordinary man.’ He was a little man, terrified of me. He would say, ‘With your permission, my dear, I shall exercise the prerogative of a husband.’ Ah, the contempt I have for him!

“I wanted force—blind, unreasoning force—and love not for my soul nor for some imagined beauty of my mind, but for the white fetish of my body. I do not want softness. I am soft. My husband uses scented lotions on his hands before he touches me, and his fingers are like thick, damp snails. I want the crush of hard muscles, the delicious pain of little hurts.”

She searched his face closely, as though looking once more for a quality that had been lost.

“I thought richly of you once; you grew into a brazen figure of the night. And now—I find you a babbler, a speaker of sweet, considered words, and rather clumsy about it. I find you are no realist at all, but only a bungling romancer. You want to marry me—to protect me. All men, save one, have wanted to protect me. In every way, I am more capable of protecting myself than you are. From the dawn of my first memory I have been made sick with phrases. I have been dressed in epithets and fed endearments. These other men, like you, would not say what they wanted. They, like you, felt it necessary to justify their passion in their own eyes. They, like you, must convince themselves, as well as me, that they love me.”

Henry Morgan had sunk his head, seemingly in shame. Now he lunged toward her.

“But I will force you then,” he cried.

“It is too late—I would perforce think of you standing there, declaiming your considered words. While you wrenched at my clothing, I would picture you fawning before me, blurting out your rehearsed poetry. And I should laugh, I’m afraid. I might even protect myself—and you, who should be somewhat an authority on rape, must know the consequence of that. No, you have failed—and I am sorry for your failure.”

“I love you,” he said miserably.

“You speak as though it were some new, tremendous thing. Many men have loved me; hundreds have said they did. But what are you going to do with me, Captain Morgan? My husband is in Peru, and my inheritance is there also.”

“I—I do not know.”

“But am I to be a slave—a prisoner?”

“Yes; I must take you away with me. The men would laugh at me otherwise. It would ruin discipline.”

“If I must be a slave,” she said, “if I must go away from my own country, I hope I shall be your slave—yours or the property of a charming young buccaneer I met last night. But I do not think you will take me, Captain Morgan. No; I do not think you will force me to go, for I will, perhaps, twist the knife I already have in your breast.”

Henry Morgan flushed with anger.

“Who was this young buccaneer?” he demanded crossly.

“Ah, you perceive the knife,” said Ysobel. “And how should I know the fellow? But he was charming, and I should like to see him again.”

The captain’s eyes flared.

“You will be locked up,” he said harshly. “You will remain in a cell until we march again for Chagres. And we shall see whether this knife you speak of is sharp enough to keep you here in Panama.”

As she followed him across the garden to her confinement, her clear laughter rang out. “Captain Morgan, it has just occurred to me—I have begun to see that a great many different kinds of men make the exact same kind of husband.”

“Get in your cell,” he snapped.

“Oh—and Captain Morgan, you will find an old woman on the steps of the palace. My duenna, she is. Send her to me, please. And now, goodbye for the time, sir; I must get to my devotions. The sin to be dissolved, Captain Morgan, is truthfulness. It is a bad thing for the soul, truthfulness.”

He went slowly back to his chair in the Hall of Audience, filled with a deep shame for his manhood. It was as though she had plucked his rapier from its scabbard and scratched his face with it while he stood helpless before her. She had beaten him without apparent effort. Now he quailed before the certainty of his men’s laughter once they discovered his embarrassment. There would be snickering when his back was turned. Groups of pirates would fall silent as he passed, and when he was gone, they would break into sharp laughter. This hidden ridicule was terrifying to Henry Morgan. His hatreds began to rear their heads; hatreds not for Ysobel, but for his own men who would laugh at him; for the people of Tortuga who would tell the story in the taverns; for the whole of the Indian Coast.

Now, from the little prison across the garden came a shrill voice praying to the Virgin. The penetrating sound charged the whole palace with a fervent cacophony. Henry Morgan listened with shame-sharpened ears for mockery in the words or in the tone, but there was no mockery. Over and over, a shrill Ave Maria; the tone of a fearful, pleading sinner—*Ora pro nobis.* A shattered world, and the blackened skeleton of a golden city—*Ora pro nobis.* No mockery at all, but brokenhearted repentance counting its poor testimony on the dropping beads. A shrill woman’s voice, piercing, insistent—it seemed to be digging at a tremendous, hopeless sin. She had said it was the sin of truthfulness. “I have been honest in my being, and that is a black lie on the soul. Forgive my body its humanity. Forgive my mind which knows its limitations. Pardon my soul for being anchored this little time to both. *Ora pro nobis.*”

The mad, endless rosary cankered in Henry’s brain. At last, he seized his rapier and his hat and bolted from the hall into the street. Behind him, the treasure lay smiling under the slanting sun.

The streets around the Governor’s Palace had not been touched by the fire. Captain Morgan walked along the paved path until he reached the ruins. Here, blackened walls had spilled their stones into the road. The cedar houses had vanished into smoking frames of ash. Here and there lay murdered citizens, grinning their last agonies into the sky.

“Their faces will be black before the night,” Henry thought. “I must have them removed, or the sickness will come.”

Lingering clouds of smoke still rose from the city, filling the air with the sickly odor of damp things burning. The green hills beyond the plain seemed incredible to Henry Morgan. He regarded them closely, then looked back at the city. This destruction which had seemed so complete, so awful during the night, was, after all, a pitifully small and circumscribed thing. Henry had not expected the hills to remain green and standing. This conquest, then, was more or less unimportant. Yes, the city was in ruins. He had destroyed the city, but the woman who had drawn him to the Cup of Gold eluded him. She had escaped him while she still lay entirely in his power. Henry winced at his impotence, shuddering at the thought of others knowing it.

A few buccaneers were poking about in the ashes, looking for melted plate that might have escaped the search of the night before. Turning a corner, Henry came upon the little Cockney Jones and saw him quickly thrust something into his pocket. A sudden flame of rage rose in Captain Morgan. Coeur de Gris had said that there was no difference between this epileptic dwarf and Henry Morgan. No difference, indeed! This man was a thief. The rage curdled into a fearful lust to hurt the little man, to humiliate him, to hold him up to the very scorn Henry Morgan had just suffered. This cruel desire drew the captain’s lips thin and white.

“What have you in your pocket?”

“Nothing—nothing, sir.”

“Let me see what you have in your pocket.” The captain leveled a heavy pistol.

“It’s nothing, sir—only a little crucifix! I found it.” He drew out a golden cross studded with diamonds, and upon it a Christ of ivory. “You see, it’s for my wife,” the Cockney explained.

“Ah! For your Spanish wife!”

“She’s half Negro, sir.”

“You know the penalty for concealing spoil?”

Jones looked at the pistol, and his face grayed. “You would not—Oh, sir, you would not—” he began chokingly. Then, he seemed to be clutched by huge, invisible fingers. His arms dropped stiffly to his sides, his lips sagged open, and a dull, imbecilic light washed into his eyes. A little foam gathered on his lips. His whole body twitched like a wooden dancing figure on a string.

Captain Morgan fired.

For a moment, the Cockney seemed to shrink. His shoulders drew in until they nearly covered his chest, like stunted wings. His hands clenched, and then the whole contracted mass crumpled to the ground, convulsing like thick, animate jelly. His lips drew back from his teeth in a last idiot snarl.

Henry Morgan prodded the body with his foot, and a change stirred in his mind. He had killed this man. It was his right to kill, to burn, to plunder—not because he was righteous, nor even because he was clever, but because he was strong. Henry Morgan was the master of Panama and all its people. There was no will in Panama save his own. He could slaughter every human in the country if he so chose. All this was true. No one would deny it. But back in the palace was a woman who held his power and his will in absolute contempt, and her contempt was a stronger weapon than his will. She parried his embarrassment and struck him at her convenience. But how could that be? he argued. No one was master in Panama but himself, and he had just killed a man to prove it. Under the battering of his own rationale, Ysobel's power waned and slowly evaporated. He would go back to the palace. He would force her as he had promised. This woman had been treated with too much consideration. She did not understand the true meaning of slavery, nor did she know the iron of Henry Morgan.

He turned about and walked back toward the palace. In the Hall of Audience he threw off his pistols, but the gray rapier remained at his side.

Ysobel was kneeling before a holy picture in her little whitewashed cell when Henry Morgan burst in upon her. The wizened duenna shrank into a corner at the sight of him, but Ysobel regarded him intently, noting his flushed face and his half-closed, fierce eyes. She heard his heavy breathing and, with a smile of comprehension, rose to her feet. Her laughter rang out in banter as she drew a long pin from her bodice and assumed the stance of a fencer: one foot forward, her left arm held behind her for balance, the pin pointed before her like a foil.

“En garde!” she cried. Then the captain rushed her. His arms encircled her shoulders, and his hands began tearing at her clothing. Ysobel stood perfectly still, but her hand darted about with the pin—striking, striking—like a small, white serpent. Drops of blood blossomed on Henry’s cheeks and throat.

“Your eyes next, Captain,” she said quietly, and stabbed him thrice on the cheekbone. Henry released her and stepped away, wiping his bloody face with the back of his hand. Ysobel laughed at him. A man may beat—may subject to every violation—a woman who cries and runs away, but he is helpless before one who stands her ground and only laughs.

“I heard a shot,” she said. “I thought perhaps you had killed someone to justify your manhood. But your manhood will suffer now, will it not? Word of this encounter will get about somehow; you know how such things travel. It will be told that you were beaten back by a pin in the hands of a woman.” Her tone was gloating and cruel.

Henry’s hand slipped to his side, and the lean rapier crept from its sheath like a frozen serpent. The light licked viciously along its slender blade. At last the needle-point cleared the scabbard, and the steel turned to aim at the woman’s breast.

Ysobel grew sick with terror. “I am a sinner,” she said. Then, a dawning relief washed into her face. She motioned the aged duenna to her and spoke in rapid, clattering Spanish.

“It is true,” said the old woman. “It is true.”

When she finished speaking, Ysobel delicately drew aside the webby lace of her mantilla so that it might not be spotted with blood. The duenna began interpreting.

“Sir, my mistress says that a true Catholic who dies at the hand of an infidel goes to heaven. This is true. Further, she says that a Catholic woman who dies protecting her holy marriage vow goes straightway to heaven. This also is true. Lastly, she thinks that such a woman might, in course of time, be canonized. Such things have happened. Ah, sir! Captain, be kind! Permit me to kiss her hand, now, before you strike. What grace to have kissed the hand of a living saint! It may do much for my own sinful soul.”

Ysobel spoke to her again.

“My mistress bids you strike; more, she urges it, pleads for the blow. The angels are hovering about her head. She sees the great light, and holy music is sounding in her ears.”

The rapier’s point lowered. Henry Morgan turned away and gazed out into the sunlit garden. Little Chico came galloping along the path and sat down in the open doorway. The little beast clasped his paws and raised them above his head as though in prayer. The lean blade made a sharp swishing sound as it was driven home into its scabbard. Captain Morgan stooped to pick up the tiny monkey, and he walked away, stroking Chico’s head with his forefinger.

### V

Henry Morgan lifted a golden cup from the heap of loot. It was a slender, lovely chalice with long curved handles and a rim of silver. Around its outer edge, four grotesque lambs chased one another; inside, on the bottom, a naked girl lifted her arms in sensual ecstasy. The captain turned the cup in his hands. Suddenly, he hurled it at a fiery pyramid of diamonds. The stones scattered from their neat pile with a dry, rustling sound. 

Henry Morgan turned and went back to his serpent chair. He was thinking of the little Cockney, Jones—thinking of the cold hand of epilepsy that had seized him in his last moments. That hand had always been behind him, a giant hand to wring the man’s body until white drops of agony oozed from his lips. Henry wondered now why he had wanted to hurt the little man—to torture, and finally to kill him. Jones had been shadowed through all his life by a sleepless tormentor. Of course, the murder had been sparked by the words of Coeur de Gris, who had said Jones was like Henry Morgan. Yes, he knew it now, and he felt a red shame for his trumped-up charge of thievery. Why could he not have killed the man without explanation?

And Coeur de Gris—where was he? He had seen Ysobel, that was certain, and she had noticed him. Perhaps she loved Coeur de Gris, with his bright hair and curious way with women. How could Henry keep the young man from knowing his defeat, from hearing the adventure of the pin and all the ignominy of his dealings with La Santa Roja? The pistol that had killed Jones lay on the floor. Henry retrieved it and methodically began to load it. He did not fear ridicule from Coeur de Gris, but rather sympathy and understanding. He wanted no understanding now. His lieutenant would look at him with compassion and pity—a pity with something superior about it, something faintly ironic. It would be the pity of a handsome youth who condones the amorous failure of one not so handsome. Besides, Coeur de Gris was almost like a woman in his intuition—almost like Ysobel. He gathered information with a mysterious, hidden eye.

And the Red Saint. Henry must take her away with him, of course. He could do nothing else. Perhaps, after a long time, she would fall in love with him—though surely not for any merit of his own. Her contempt had convinced him that he had no merits, that he was a monstrous being, set apart from other men by unmentionable ugliness. She had not said as much, but she had intimated it. No, he lacked the qualities to draw a woman to his side when there were other men about. But perhaps, if she saw no other men, she might overlook what he lacked. She might come, at last, to build on something he possessed.

He thought of his last scene with her. Now that he was calm, his wild behavior felt like the showing-off of a thick-legged little boy. Yet how could any man have done otherwise? She had beaten his assault with laughter—a sharp, cruel laughter that dragged his motives into the light and made sport of them. He might have killed her, but what man could kill a woman who *wanted* to be killed, who begged for it? The thing was impossible. He rammed a bullet into the muzzle of his pistol.

A draggled, unkempt figure appeared in the doorway. It was Coeur de Gris—red-eyed and mud-spattered, the blood of battle still on his face. He looked at the heap of treasure.

“We are rich,” he said without enthusiasm.

“Where have you been, Coeur de Gris?”

“Been? Why, I have been drunk. It is good to be drunk after fighting.” He smiled wryly and licked his lips. “It is not so good to *stop* being drunk. That is like childbirth—necessary, but unpleasant and unornamental.”

“I wanted you by my side,” said Henry.

“You wanted me? I was informed that you wanted no one—that you were quite complete and happy in yourself—and so I got a little drunker. You see, sir, I did not want to remember your reason for being alone.” He paused. “I was told that the Red Saint is here.” Coeur de Gris laughed at his own ill-concealed emotion, then changed his manner with an effort of will. His tone became jocular.

“Tell me the truth, sir. It is a small gift for a man to know what he has missed. Many people receive no other gift in their entire lives. Tell me, sir, has the sweet enemy fallen? Has the castle of flesh capitulated? Does the standard of Morgan float over the pink tower?”

Henry’s face flushed. The pistol in his hand rose quietly, steadied by an inexorable madness. There was a sharp crash and a billowing cloud of white smoke.

Coeur de Gris stood exactly as he was. He seemed to be intently listening to some distant, throbbing sound. Then a grimace of terror spread across his face. His fingers frantically explored his breast, following a trickle of blood to its source: a small hole over his lung. His little finger edged into the wound. Coeur de Gris smiled again. He was not afraid of certain things. Now that he knew, he was no longer frightened.

Captain Morgan stared stupidly at the pistol in his hand.

He seemed surprised to discover it there, startled by its presence.

Coeur de Gris laughed hysterically.

“My mother will hate you,” he cried ruefully. “She will practice all her ancient curses upon you. My mother—” He choked on his breath. “Do not tell her. Make up some gleaming lie. Build my poor life into a golden minaret. Do not let it stop as a half-finished tower. But, no—you need only build a foundation. If you give her that, she will finish the structure of heroic memory herself. She will build me a tomb of white, inaccurate thoughts.” His throat filled with blood. “Why did you do it, sir?”

The captain looked up from the pistol.

“Do it?” He saw the bloody lips, the torn breast. He started up from his chair, then fell back into it. Misery etched deep lines around his eyes. “I do not know,” he said. “I must have known, but I have forgotten.”

Coeur de Gris sank slowly to his knees, steadying himself with his knuckles against the floor. “It is my knees, sir; they will not bear me anymore,” he apologized. He seemed to be listening for that throbbing sound again. Suddenly, his voice rose in bitter complaint.

“It is a legend that dying men think of their deeds done. No—no—I think of what I have *not* done, of what I might have done in the years that are dying with me. I think of the lips of women I have never seen, of the wine that is still sleeping in a grape seed, of the quick, warm caress of my mother in Goaves. But mostly I think that I shall never walk about again—never, never stroll in the sunshine, nor smell the rich essences the full moon conjures out of the earth. Sir, why did you do it?”

Henry was staring at the pistol again. “I do not know,” he muttered sullenly. “I must have known, but I have forgotten. I killed a dog once—and I have just killed Jones. I do not know why.”

“You are a great man, Captain,” Coeur de Gris said bitterly. “Great men may leave their reasons to the creative hands of their apologists. But I—why, sir, I am nothing anymore—nothing. A moment ago, I was an excellent swordsman; but now, my being—that which fought, and cursed, and loved—it may never have been, for all I know.” His wrists weakened. He collapsed onto his side and lay there, coughing at the obstruction in his throat. For a time, there was no sound in the room save his uneven gasping. Suddenly, he raised himself on one elbow and laughed—laughed at some cosmic joke, some jest of the great rolling spheres. He laughed triumphantly, as though he had solved a puzzle and discovered how simple it was. A wave of blood rode the laughter to his lips, filling his throat. The laugh became a gushing sigh, and Coeur de Gris sank slowly back and was still. His lungs could no longer force breath.

Henry still stared at the pistol in his hand. Slowly, he raised his eyes to the open window. The streaming rays of the sun made the treasure on the floor glow like a mass of hot metal. His eyes wandered back to the body. He shuddered. Getting up, he went to Coeur de Gris, lifted him, and seated him in a chair. The limp body slumped to one side. Henry straightened it, bracing it upright, and returned to his serpent chair.

“I raised my hand like this—” he said, aiming the pistol at Coeur de Gris. “I raised my hand like this. I must have. Coeur de Gris is dead. Like this, I raised it—like this—and pointed. How did I do it?” He bowed his head, then raised it with a dark chuckle.

“Coeur de Gris!” he said. “Coeur de Gris! I wanted to tell you about La Santa Roja. She rides horses, you know. She has no womanly modesty at all—none at all—and her looks are only moderate.” He peered at the propped figure before him. The eyes of Coeur de Gris had been only half-closed, but now the lids slipped down and the eyes began to sink back into his head. On his face remained the frozen distortion of his last bitter laughter.

“Coeur de Gris!” the captain shouted. He went quickly to the body and laid a hand on its forehead.

“This is a dead thing,” he said musingly. “This is only a dead thing. It will bring flies and sickness. I must have it taken away at once, before it brings the flies into this room. Coeur de Gris! We have been fooled. The woman fences like a man, and she rides horses astride. So much labor lost for us! That’s what we get for believing everything we hear—eh, Coeur de Gris? But this is only a dead thing, and the flies will come to it.”

He was interrupted by the tramp of feet on the stairs. A band of his men entered, driving a frightened Spaniard in their midst—a mud-draggled, terrified Spaniard. The lace had been torn from his neck, and a thin stream of blood ran down one sleeve.

“Here is a Spaniard, sir,” the leader said. “He came to the city bearing a white flag. Shall we respect the white flag, sir? He has silver on his saddle. Shall we kill him? Perhaps he is a spy.”

Henry Morgan ignored the speech. Instead, he pointed to the body in the chair.

“That is only a dead thing,” he announced. “That is not Coeur de Gris. I sent Coeur de Gris away. He will be back soon. But that is... I raised my hand like this—do you see?—like this. I know exactly how I did it; I have tried it again and again. But that is a dead thing. It will bring the flies to us.” He cried out, “Oh, take it away and bury it in the earth!”

A buccaneer moved to lift the body.

“Don’t touch him! Don’t you dare touch him! Leave him where he is. He is smiling. Do you see him smile? But the flies... No, leave him. I will care for him myself.”

“This Spaniard, sir—what shall we do with him? Shall we kill him?”

“What Spaniard?”

“Why, this one before you, sir.” The buccaneer shoved the man forward. Henry seemed to awaken from a deep dream.

“What do you want?” he asked harshly.

The Spaniard struggled with his fright.

“It—it is my wish and the wish of my *padrone* to have speech with one Captain Morgan, if he will have the goodness. I am a messenger, Señor—not a spy, as these gentlemen suggest.”

“What is your message?” Henry’s voice had grown weary.

The messenger took reassurance from his changed tone. “I come from a very rich man, Señor. You have his wife.”

“I have his wife?”

“She was taken in the city, Señor.”

“Her name?”

“She is the Doña Ysobel Espinoza, Valdez y los Gabilanes, Señor. The simple people of the city call her La Santa Roja.”

Henry regarded him for a long time. “Yes, I have her,” he said finally. “She is in a cell. What does her husband wish?”

“He offers a ransom, Señor. He has reason to wish his wife with him again.”

“What ransom does he offer?”

“What would Your Excellency suggest?”

“Twenty thousand pieces of eight,” Henry said quickly. 

The messenger was staggered. “Twenty thous—*veinte mil*—” He translated it to fully comprehend the enormity of the amount. “I perceive that Your Excellency also wants the woman.”

Henry looked at the body of Coeur de Gris. “No,” he said. “I want the money.”

The messenger was relieved. He had been prepared to think this great man a great idiot. “I will do what may be done, Señor. I will come back to you in four days.”

“In three!”

“But if I do not arrive in time, Señor?”

“If you do not arrive, I shall take the Red Saint away with me and sell her on the slave docks.”

“I shall strive, Señor.”

“Give him courtesy!” the captain commanded his men. “Do not mistreat him in any way. He is to bring us gold.”

As they were leaving, one man turned back, letting his eyes lovingly caress the treasure.

“When is the division to be, sir?”

“In Chagres, fool! Do you think I would divide it now?”

“But, sir, we would like to have a bit of it in our hands—just for the feel of it. We have fought hard, sir.”

“Get out! You’ll have none of it in your hands until we reach the ships again. Do you think I want you throwing it to the women here? Let the Goaves women get it from you.”

The men went out of the Hall of Audience, grumbling a little.

### VI

The buccaneers were rioting in Panama. Barrels of wine had been rolled into a large warehouse. The floor had been cleared of its clutter of merchandise, and now a wild dance was in progress. Scores of women were there—women who had gone over to the pirates. They danced and flung themselves about to the shrieking of flutes, as though their feet did not sound upon the grave of Panama. They, dear economists, were winning back a portion of the lost treasure, using a weapon slower but no less sure than the sword.

In a corner of the warehouse sat The Burgundian and his one-armed protector.

“See, Emil! That one there—consider her hips now!”

“I see her, ’Toine, and it is good of you. Do not think I fail to appreciate the trouble you take for my pleasure. But I am silly enough to demand an ideal, even in copulation. This proves to me that I am still an artist, if not a gentleman.”

“But see, Emil. Notice for a moment the fullness of her bosom.”

“No, ’Toine; I see nothing that endangers my rose pearl. I will keep it by me a while yet.”

“But really, my friend, I think you are losing your sense of beauty. Where is that careful eye we used to fear so much upon our canvases?”

“The eye is here, ’Toine. It is still here. It is your own little eye that makes nymphs out of brown mares.”

“Then—then, Emil, since you persist in your blindness, perhaps you would condescend to lend me your rose pearl. There—I thank you. I shall return it presently.”

Grippo was seated in the middle of the floor, sullenly counting the buttons on his sleeve.

“—eight, nine—there were ten. Some bastard has stolen my button. Ah, this world of thieves! It is too much. I would kill for that button. It was my favorite button. One, two, three—why, there are ten. One, two, three, four—” About him the dancers rocked, and the air reeked with the shrill cries of the flutes.

Captain Sawkins glowered at the dancers. He firmly believed that to dance was to go to hell by a short route. Beside him, Captain Zeigler sadly watched the flow of liquor. This Zeigler was called the Tavern Keeper of the Sea. It was his practice, after a raid, to keep the men at sea until they had spent their plunder buying the rum he supplied. It is said he once faced a mutiny because he sailed around and around a single island for three months. He could not help it. The men still had money and he still had rum. Tonight he was saddened by these barrels of liquor, which were being drained without the obbligato of coins ringing on a counter. It felt unnatural to him, and mischievous.

Henry Morgan sat alone in the Hall of Audience. He could barely hear the crying music of the dance. Throughout the day, small bands of men had trickled in, bearing bits of belated treasure dug from the earth or drawn with iron hooks from the cisterns. One old woman had swallowed a diamond to save it, but the searchers had dug for that, too, and found it.

Now a gray twilight filled the Hall of Audience. Henry Morgan had sat in his tall chair all through the day, and the day had changed him. His eyes—those peering eyes that had once looked out over a living horizon—were turned inward. He had been looking at himself, looking perplexedly at Henry Morgan. Through the years of his life and his adventuring, he had believed so completely in his purpose, whatever it might have been at the moment, that he had given the man himself little thought. But today he had considered himself; and now, in the gray twilight, he was bewildered at the sight of Henry Morgan. Henry Morgan did not seem worthy, or even important. Those desires and ambitions toward which he had bayed across the world like a scenting hound were shabby things, now that he looked inward. Wonderment, gray as the twilight, settled about him in the Hall of Audience.

As he sat in the half-dark, the wrinkled duenna crept in and stood before him. Her voice was like the crumpling of paper.

“My lady wishes to speak with you,” she said.

Henry rose and walked heavily after her toward the cell. A candle burned before the holy picture on the wall. The Madonna represented was a fat Spanish peasant, holding a flabby child at whom she looked with sad astonishment. The priest who painted it had meant to put reverence upon her face, but he possessed so little experience with reverence. He had been successful, however, in making it a good portrait of his dull mistress and his child. Four reales the picture had brought him.

Ysobel sat under the picture. When Henry entered, she went quickly to him.

“It is said I am to be ransomed.”

“Your husband sent a messenger.”

“My husband! I am to go back to him? To his scented hands?”

“Yes.”

She pointed to a chair and forced Henry to seat himself. “You did not understand me,” she said. “You could not understand me. You must know something of the path I have traveled. I must tell you this, and then you will understand me, and then—”

She awaited his interest. Henry was silent.

“Don’t you wish to hear it?” she asked.

“Yes.”

“Well, it is short. My life has been short. But I want you to understand me, and then—”

She looked sharply into his face. Henry’s mouth was pinched as though in pain. His eyes were clouded with bewilderment. He made no reply to her pause.

“It was this way, you see,” she began. “I was born here in Panama, but my parents sent me to Spain when I was a small child. I lived in a convent in Cordova. I wore gray dresses and kept vigil before the Virgin on my nights given to adoration. Sometimes I went to sleep when I should have been praying. I have suffered for that laxness. After I had been there a number of years, the bravos raided my father’s plantation here in Panama and killed my entire family. I was left with no relative save one old grandfather. I was alone, and I was sad. For a time, I no longer slept on the floor before the Virgin.

“That I had grown handsome, I knew, for once a visiting Cardinal looked at me, and his lips trembled, and the great veins stood out on his hands when I kissed his ring. He said, ‘Peace be with you, my daughter. Have you anything you would like to confess to me privately?’

“I heard the cry of the water sellers over the wall, and I heard the scuffle of a quarrel. Once two men fought with swords in sight of me, as I balanced on a piece of wood and looked over the wall. And one night a young man brought a girl to the shadow of the gate and lay with her there, not two paces from me. I heard them whisper together, she protesting her fears, and he reassuring her. I fingered my gray gown and wondered whether this boy would plead with me if he had known me. When I spoke to one of the sisters about that night, she said, ‘It is wicked to hear such things, and more wicked to think of them. You must do penance for your curious ears. What gate did you say?’

“The fishmonger would cry, ‘Come, little gray angels, and look upon my basket of catch. Come out of your holy prison, little gray angels.’

“One night I climbed over the wall and went away from the city. I do not mean to tell you of my journeying, but only of the day when I came to Paris. The King was riding through the streets, and his equipage was all glittering and gold. I stood high on my toes in the crowd of people and watched the courtiers go riding by. Then, suddenly, a dark face was thrust before me, and a strong hand took my arm. I was led to a doorway away from the crowd.

“See, Captain; he whipped me with a thong of hard leather he kept only for that purpose. His face had something of a beast’s snarl hiding very near the surface. But he was free—a bold, free thief. He killed before he stole—always he killed. And we lived in entryways, and on the floors of churches, and under the land arch of a bridge, and we were free—free from thoughts and free from fears and worries. But one day he went away from me, and I found him hanging by the neck from a gallows—oh, a great gallows, festooned with men hanging by their necks.

“Can you understand that, Captain? Do you see that as I saw it? And does it mean anything at all to you?” Her eyes were on fire.

“I walked back to Cordova, my feet torn. I did penance until my body was torn, but I could not drive out all the devil. I was exorcised, but the devil lay deep within me. Can you understand that, Captain?” She looked into Henry’s face and saw that he had not been listening. She stood beside him and moved her fingers through his graying hair.

“You have changed,” she said. “Some light has gone out of you. What fear has fallen upon you?”

He stirred from his reverie.

“I do not know.”

“I was told that you killed your friend. Is it that which burdens you?”

“I killed him.”

“And do you mourn for him?”

“Perhaps. I do not know. I think I mourn for some other thing that is dead. He might have been a vital half of me, which in dying leaves me but half a man. Today I have felt like a bound slave on a white marble slab, with the gathered vivisectors about me. I was supposed to be a healthy slave, but the scalpels found me sick with a disease called mediocrity.”

“I am sorry,” she said.

“You are sorry? Why are you sorry?”

“I think I am sorry because of your lost light, because the brave, brutal child in you is dead—the boastful child who mocked, and thought his mockery shook the throne of God; the confident child who graciously permitted the world to accompany him through space. This child is dead, and I am sorry. I would go with you now, if I thought it possible to warm that child back to life.”

Henry said, “It is strange. Two days ago I planned to tear a continent out of the set order and crown it with a capital of gold for you. In my mind, I built up an empire for you, and designed the diadem you would wear. And now I dimly remember the person who thought these things. He is an enigmatic stranger upon a staggering globe.

“And you—I feel only a slight uneasiness with you. I am not afraid of you anymore. I do not want you anymore. I am filled with a nostalgia for my own black mountains and for the speech of my own people. I am drawn to sit on a deep veranda and hear the talk of an old man I once knew. I find I am tired of all this bloodshed and struggle for things that will not lie still, for articles that will not retain their value in my hands. It is horrible,” he cried. “I do not want anything anymore. I have no lusts; my desires are dry and rattling. I have only a vague wish for peace and the time to ponder imponderable matters.”

“You will take no more cups of gold,” she said. “You will turn no more vain dreams into unsatisfactory conquests. I am sorry for you, Captain Morgan. And you were not right about the slave. Ill he was, indeed—but not with the illness you have mentioned. But I suppose your sins are great. All men who break the bars of mediocrity commit frightful sins. I shall pray for you to the Holy Virgin, and she will intercede for you at the throne of Heaven. But what am I to do?”

“You will go back to your husband, I suppose.”

“Yes, I will go back. You have made me old, Señor. You have pricked the dream upon which my heavy spirit floated. And I wonder whether, in the years to come, you will blame me for the death of your friend.”

Henry flushed quickly.

“I am trying to do something of that sort now,” he said. “It does not seem worth the trouble to lie anymore, and that is only one more proof of dead youth. But now, goodbye, Ysobel. I wish I loved you now as I thought I did yesterday. Go back to your husband’s scented hands.”

She smiled and raised her eyes to the holy picture on the wall. “Peace go with you, dear fool,” she murmured. “Ah, I too have lost my youth. I am old—old—for I cannot console myself with the thought of what you have missed.”

### VII

Henry Morgan stood in the doorway of the Hall of Audience and watched a little troupe of Spaniards ride through the streets toward the palace, surrounded by a mob of buccaneers. Leading the line rode the messenger, but a changed messenger. He was dressed now in scarlet silk. The plume of his hat and his sword’s scabbard were white in token of peace. Behind him rode six soldiers in silver breastplates and Spanish helmets that looked like half mustard seeds. The last soldier led a riderless white mare with crimson trappings and a line of golden bells on its brow band, its white saddle cloth nearly touching the ground. Following the mare were six mules bearing heavy leathern bags, and six more soldiers brought up the rear.

The cavalcade drew up before the palace. The messenger leaped from his horse and bowed to Henry Morgan.

“I have here the ransom,” he said. He looked tired; the weight of his mission rode heavily upon him. At his command, the soldiers carried the leather bags into the Hall of Audience. Only when they were safely deposited with the rest of the plunder did the anxiety leave his face.

“Ah,” he sighed, “it is good. The treasure. Twenty thousand pieces of eight—not one lost by the wayside. I invite you to count them, Señor.” He whipped a little dust from his boot. “If my men could have refreshments, Señor—wine, perhaps?”

“Yes, yes.” Henry motioned to one of his followers. “See that these men have food and drink. Be courteous, as you love life.”

Then he went to the bags to count the ransom. He made little towers of shining coins and moved them about the floor. Money was bright, he thought. It could have been cut in no more charming shape; a square would not answer, nor an ellipse. And money meant so much more than the metal it was stamped on. He tumbled a tower and built it up again. It was so extremely certain—money. One knew beforehand exactly what it would do if set in motion, at least up to a point. Beyond that point, it hardly mattered what it accomplished. One might buy wine with money, and one had the wine. If the merchant’s clerk should later kill his master for those same coins, it was unfortunate—perhaps it was Fate or something like it—but one had the wine just the same.

All this pile of golden vessels—these crosses and candlesticks and pearl-sewn vestments—would become money like this. These bars of gold and silver would be cut into round flakes, and each flake stamped with a picture. The picture would be more than a mere image. Like the kiss of a saint, it would endow the flake with power; the stamp would give it a character and a curious, compelling soul. He flung the coins into a heap and patiently set about rebuilding them. Enough towers for Jerusalem!

Now Ysobel came from the patio and stood beside him.

“What an amount of money,” she said. “Is that my ransom?”

“Yes. It is the gold that purchases you.”

“But what a very great deal! Am I worth that much, do you think?”

“To your husband you are. He paid it.” He moved ten towers into a line.

“And to you—how much? How many of these golden chips?”

“You must have been worth that much to me. I stated the price.”

“Wouldn’t they skip well on the water!” she mused. “How they would skip! Do you know, I can throw like a boy, with my arm bent.”

“I was told you were capable,” he said.

“But am I really worth that much?”

“The money is here, and you are to go. It has bought you. A thing must be worth what is paid for it, or there could be no trade.”

“It is good,” she said. “It is comforting to know one’s value to the very real. Have you any idea of your own worth, Captain?”

Henry Morgan said, “If I were ever captured and a ransom demanded for me, I would not be worth a copper penny. These dogs of mine would laugh and shrug. A new captain would rise to lead them, and I—well, I would be subject to the pleasure of my captors, and I think I could foretell their pleasure. You see, I have been revaluing myself in the last few days. I may have some value to historians because I have destroyed a few things. The builder of your Cathedral is forgotten even now, but I, who burned it, may be remembered for a hundred years or so. And that may mean something or other about mankind.”

“But what is there about me that is worth all this gold?” she insisted. “Is it my arms, do you suppose? My hair? Or is it that I am merely the embodiment of my husband’s vanity?”

“I do not know,” said Henry. “With the revaluation of myself, my whole economic system of emotions and persons has changed. Were I to demand a ransom today, perhaps you would not be flattered.”

“Do you so hate me, Captain Morgan?”

“No, I do not hate you. But you are one of the stars in my firmament that has proven to be a meteor.”

“That is not gallant, sir. That is quite different from your speech of a few days past,” she observed spitefully.

“No, it is not gallant. I think that hereafter I shall be gallant for two reasons only: money and advancement. I tried to be gallant for the pure, joyous look of things. You see, I was honest with myself before, and I am honest with myself now. Those two honesties are antithetical.”

“You are bitter.”

“No, I am not even bitter. The food that bitterness feeds on has gone out of me.”

“I am going now,” she said softly, almost wistfully. “Have you nothing more to say to me about myself? Nothing more to ask of me?”

“Nothing,” he answered, and immediately went back to piling his coins.

The messenger entered from the street. He had drunk deeply, the lifted burden of his mission having made him joyous. He bowed to Ysobel and to Henry Morgan—bowed warily, with a careful eye to his balance.

“We must go, Señor,” he announced loudly. “The way is long.” 

He led Ysobel to the white mare and helped her into the saddle. At his signal, the column moved off down the street. Ysobel looked back once as they started, and it seemed she had taken a mood from Henry Morgan, for a puzzled smile touched her lips. But then she bent her head over the mare’s neck, intently studying its white mane.

The messenger had remained standing at Henry’s side in the doorway. Together they watched the fluid line of riders swing away while the sunlight glinted on the soldiers’ armor. In the center of the troupe, the white mare seemed a pearl in a setting of silver.

The messenger put a heavy hand on Henry’s shoulder.

“We know how to understand each other, we men of responsibilities,” he said drunkenly. “It is not as though we were children to have secrets. We are men, brave and strong. We may confide in each other. You may tell me the thing nearest your heart if you wish, Señor.”

Henry shook the hand from his shoulder. “I have nothing to tell you,” he said brusquely.

“Ah, but then I will tell you something. Perhaps you wondered why the husband of this woman was willing to pay such a vast sum for her. She is only a woman, you say. There are many women to be had more cheaply—some for a real or two. Her husband is a fool, you say. But I would not have you think that of my master. He is no fool. I will tell you how it is: her grandfather still lives, and he is the owner of ten silver mines and fifty leagues of fertile land in Peru. Doña Ysobel is the heiress. Now, if she were killed or carried off—well, you understand, Señor. Poof! The fortune falls into the King’s arms!” He laughed at the cleverness of the arrangement. “We understand each other, Señor. We have tough skulls—not the soft heads of chickens. Twenty thousand—it is nothing to be reckoned against ten silver mines. Ah, yes, we understand each other, we men of responsibilities.”

He clambered into his saddle and rode away, still laughing. Henry Morgan saw him join the undulating cavalcade; now there was a ruby beside the pearl in the silver setting.

Captain Morgan went back to the treasure. He sat on the floor and gathered the coins into his hands. *The most human of all human traits is inconsistency,* he thought. *It is a shock to learn this thing—almost as great a shock as a man's first realization of his own humanity. And why must we learn it last? In all the mad incongruity, the senseless clamor of life, I felt, at least, securely anchored to myself. Whatever the vacillations of other people, I thought myself terrifically constant. But now, here I am, dragging a frayed line, my anchor gone. I do not know whether the rope was cut or merely worn away, but the anchor is gone. And I am sailing around and around an island in which there is no iron.* 

He let the gold pieces slip through his fingers. *But perhaps here is the iron for the making of a new anchor. This is hard and heavy. Its value may fluctuate somewhat in the economic currents, but at least it has a purpose, and only one purpose. It is an absolute assurance of security. Yes, perhaps this is the one true anchor; the one thing a man may be utterly sure of. Its claws hook tightly to comfort and security. Strangely, I have a sudden craving for them both.*

*But other men have a share in this gold,* part of his brain argued.

*No, my dear conscience; we have an end of acting now. I have put on new glasses—rather, they have been locked about my head—and I must order my life in accordance with the world I see through these new lenses. I see that honesty—public honesty—may be a ladder to a higher, more valuable crime; veracity a means to more subtle dissimulation. No, these men have no rights they can enforce. They were too free with the rights of others to deserve consideration.* 

He stumbled happily on the thought. *They steal, and so shall their plunder be stolen.*

*But I said I was finished with evasions and conscience-drugging,* he corrected himself. *What have I to do with right now? Or reason, or logic, or conscience? I want this money. I want security and comfort, and I have the power between my hands to take both. It may not be the ideal of youth, but I think it has been the world’s practice from the beginning. Luckily, perhaps, the world is not operated by youth.*

“And besides,” he muttered aloud, “these fools of men do not deserve any of it. They would only throw it away in the brothels the moment we came home.”

### VIII

The buccaneers marched out of ruined Panama, driving mules laden with their treasure across the isthmus. By the time they reached Chagres, the men were exhausted; nevertheless, the following day was set for the division of spoils. To facilitate this, the entire hoard was stored aboard a single ship—the great galleon that had been commanded by a Duke before the pirates captured it. From this vessel, the plunder would be parceled out. Captain Morgan was in high spirits. The journey was over, he told his men, and it was time for pleasure. He rolled forty kegs of rum out onto the beach.

Early the next morning, a sleepy pirate opened his bloodshot eyes and squinted toward the sea. He stared at the empty water where the galleon had been. He roused his comrades, and in a moment the shore was lined with disappointed men who wistfully searched the horizon. The galleon had slipped away during the night, and all the wealth of Panama had gone with her.

Rage swept through the buccaneers. They would give chase; they would hunt down the fugitive and torture Captain Morgan. But pursuit was impossible. The remaining ships were worthless. Some lay on the sandy bottom with great holes punched in their hulls; on others, the masts had been sawed nearly through.

Violence and bitter cursing erupted along the beach. They swore brotherhood in the name of revenge, plotting the horrors of their retribution. And then they scattered. Some starved; some were tortured by the Indians. The Spaniards caught and strangled a number of them, and England virtuously hanged a few.

## Chapter V

### I

A multifarious crowd gathered on the beach at Port Royal. They had come to see the Captain Morgan who had plundered Panama. Great ladies, draped in the silks of China, were there because, after all, Henry Morgan came of a good family—the nephew of the poor dear Lieutenant-Governor who was killed. Sailors were there because he was a sailor; little boys because he was a pirate; young girls because he was a hero; business men because he was rich; gangs of slaves because they had a holiday. There were prostitutes with berry juice smeared on their lips and restless eyes searching the faces of unaccompanied men; and there were girl children whose hearts mothered the secret, sacred hope that the great man might look their way and find the understanding he must crave.

In the crowd were sailors whose pride lay in having heard Captain Morgan curse; tailors who had fitted breeches to his legs. Any man who had seen Henry Morgan and heard him speak gathered a group of admirers. These lucky ones had absorbed a bit of his greatness from the contact.

The Negro slaves, freed from the fields for this day of rejoicing, gazed with huge, vacant eyes at the galleon riding in the harbor. Plantation owners strode among the crowd, talking loudly of what they would say when they had Henry Morgan out to dinner, and how they would advise him. They spoke of him lightly and carelessly, as though it were their constant practice to entertain plunderers of Panama. Tavern keepers had broached casks of wine on the beach, pouring freely for all who asked. Their profit would come later, from the thirst they had only whetted.

On a small pier waited the Governor’s party: handsome young men in laces and silver buckles, flanked by a squad of pikemen for official consequence. The sea fanned delicate, unbroken waves against the sand. It was late morning, and the sun a glaring crucible in the sky, but no one felt the heat; the people had eyes and feelings for nothing but the tall galleon riding at anchor.

Noon had come when Henry Morgan, who had been watching the beach through a glass, decided to go ashore. His delay was not mere vanity. During the night, a small boat had come alongside bearing news that he might be arrested for fighting the King's enemies. Henry hoped the people's approval would weigh in his favor. All morning he had watched that approval swell as the crowd grew increasingly frantic.

Now his longboat was lowered, and the sailors took their places. As it approached the shore, the mob broke into yells, then a concerted, roaring cheer. People threw their hats, leaped, danced, grimaced, and tried to shriek conversations at one another. At the pier, hands extended to grasp Henry’s before he was even out of the boat. The moment he stepped up, the pikemen formed a ring around the official party, lowering their weapons to force a rough passage through the fighting, craning spectators.

Henry glanced with apprehension at the soldiers surrounding him. “Am I under arrest?” he asked the cavalier walking beside him.

“Under arrest!” The man laughed. “No! We couldn’t arrest you if we wanted to. The mob would tear us to pieces. And if we did succeed in the arrest, they would tear the stones from the jail with their bare hands to free you. You do not realize what you are to these people, sir. For days they have talked of nothing but your arrival. But the Governor wants to see you immediately, sir. He couldn’t come here himself for obvious reasons.”

They arrived at the Governor’s mansion.

“Captain Morgan,” said Governor Moddyford, when they were alone, “I don’t know whether my news is good or bad. Word of your conquest has reached the King. Both of us are ordered to England.”

“But I had a commission—” Henry began.

The Governor’s fat head and shoulders shook in a sad negative. “Now I wouldn’t mention the commission, Captain, if I were you, even though I myself issued it. There are clauses in it that might get us both criticized. As it is, we may be hanged: but I don’t know—I don’t know. Of course, there is peace between Spain and England—but no good feeling, none at all. The King is angry with us, but I think a few thousand pounds distributed in the right quarters might placate him, even if he were mad with rage. The English people are filled with joy over the conquest. Don’t worry about it, Captain; I certainly do not.” He looked keenly into Henry’s eyes. “I hope, sir, that you can spare those few thousands when the time comes.”

Henry replied with official stiffness, “I have tried to serve the spirit of my sovereign’s wish, not the outward play of his politics.” And then, “Surely, Sir Charles; I have enough to buy the King’s favor though it cost half a million. They say the King is a good man and a judge of fine women, and I never knew such a man not to need money.”

“There is another thing, Captain,” said the Governor uneasily. “Your uncle was killed some time ago. His daughter is here in my house. Sir Edward was nearly penniless when he died. Of course, you understand, we would like to have her stay here with us always, but I do not think she is quite happy. I think she chafes under what she considers charity. You will look to her welfare, of course. Sir Edward died nobly and was commended by the King, but after all, the Crown's commendation cannot be spent.”

Henry smiled. “My uncle *would* have died nobly. I am sure this uncle of mine made every move in his life—yes, down to the paring of his nails—as though the entire peerage were looking on, ready to make critical comments.

“How did he die? Making a short, fitting oration? Or with those damned thin lips pressed together as though he disapproved of death for social reasons? Ah, that man! His life was a fine, simple performance, and he was very true to it.” Henry laughed. “I hated my uncle. I think he frightened me. He was one of the few people I feared. But tell me how he died.”

“It is whispered that he groaned once. I traced the rumor and found that some servant had been hiding behind a curtain. He undoubtedly told of it.”

“Too bad! Too bad! What a cruel shame it is to ruin a perfect life with a single exhalation. But now I am not afraid of him anymore. If he groaned there was humanity in him, and weakness. I despise him, but I love him for it. As for my cousin, you may be sure I shall take her off your hands. I dimly remember her as a tall little girl with yellow hair—a little girl who played abominably on the harp; at least it sounded abominable to me, though it may have been quite good.”

Moddyford finally broached a subject he had been eager to raise.

“I have heard that you met the Red Saint in Panama and released her for a ransom. How did that happen? She was said to be the pearl of the earth.”

Henry reddened.

“Oh, well,” he said, “it seemed to me that the legend flattered her. She was nice looking, surely; and I won't say some men wouldn't have been taken with her. But she was not the kind of woman I admire for myself. She was rather free in her speech, you know—spoke of unfeminine things, in my opinion. Besides, she rode horses astride, and fenced. In short, she was without that modesty we have come to look for in well-bred women.”

“But as a mistress—Surely, as a mistress?”

“Well, you see, I received seventy-five thousand pieces of eight for her. To my mind, that is worth more than any woman who was ever born.”

“That much ransom? How did she happen to bring so much?”

“Why, on investigation, I found that she was an heiress. And as I say, she was nice looking, but still—the legend flattered her.”

—

Meanwhile, in another room, Lady Moddyford was earnestly talking to Elizabeth.

“I find I must speak to you as a mother, my dear, a mother looking to your future. There is absolutely no doubt that your cousin will look out for you; but would you be happy that way?—just clinging to his purse-strings, I mean? Look at him in another light. He is rich and well-favored. You understand, my dear, that one cannot be delicate about this, nor do I know that it would be desirable even if one could. Why don’t you marry your cousin? If nothing else came of it, you would be the one woman on earth who could not criticize her husband’s relatives.”

“But what are you suggesting, Lady Moddyford?” Elizabeth asked meekly. “Isn’t it some kind of crime to marry one’s cousin?”

“Not a bit of it, my dear. There is nothing in church or state to forbid it, and I myself would favor such a marriage. Sir Charles and your cousin have been ordered to England. Sir Charles believes a knighthood might be arranged. Then you would be Lady Morgan, and you would be rich.”

Elizabeth mused: “I only saw him once, for a moment, and I don’t think I quite liked him. He was flushed and excited. But he was very respectful and gentle. I think he wanted to be friends with me, but my father—you know how Papa was. Perhaps he would make a good husband.”

“My dear, any man makes a good husband if he is properly looked after.”

“Yes, it might be the best way out. I am tired of being pitied for my poverty. But with this new popularity, do you think he would notice me? He might be too proud to marry a penniless cousin.”

“Dear Elizabeth,” Lady Moddyford said firmly, “don’t you know by now that almost any woman can marry almost any man as long as another woman doesn’t interfere? And I shall arrange matters so that no one will get in your way. You may trust me for that.”

Elizabeth had made up her mind. “I know; I shall play for him. I have heard how music affects these fierce men. I shall play my new pieces for him—‘The Elves’ Concourse,’ and ‘God Bears the Weary Soul to Rest.’”

“No,” broke in Lady Moddyford. “No, I wouldn’t do that if I were you. He might not like fine music. There are better ways.”

“But you said those pieces were very pretty; you said it yourself. And haven’t I read how music soothes men until they can hardly bear it?”

“Very well, my dear; play for him, then, if you will. Perhaps he—But play for him. Such things may run in the family—the love of music, I mean. Of course, you know, you must admire him and at the same time be a little afraid of him. Make him feel that you are a poor, helpless little creature completely hemmed in by tigers. But you must arrange it in your own way. You have a good start, for you may appeal to him for protection from the beginning.” She sighed. “I don’t know what we should do without protection. I don’t know when Sir Charles would have proposed to me. The dear man was frightened out of his wits to begin with. One afternoon we sat on a bench, and I practically scoured the landscape for something to frighten me. We must have been there three hours before a little water-snake slithered along the path and terrified me into his arms. No, I can’t think what we should do without protection. Sir Charles has a man in the garden all the time looking for snakes. And do you know, I have always liked snakes. I had three of them for pets when I was a little girl.”

The next morning, Lady Moddyford brought them together, and, as soon as she gracefully could, left them alone.

Elizabeth looked fearfully at her cousin.

“You have done great, terrible things on the ocean, Captain Morgan—enough to freeze one just thinking of them,” she said falteringly.

“The deeds were not great, nor very dreadful. Nothing is ever quite as good or as bad as the telling of it.”

And he thought, “I was wrong about her—very wrong. She is not supercilious at all. It must have been her father—the devil—who gave me a wrong impression of her. She is quite nice.”

“I am sure yours were great, if your modesty would let you admit it,” she said demurely. “Do you know, I used to tremble at the tales they told of you, and hoped you were not in need or trouble.”

“Did you? Why did you? I didn’t think you ever noticed me.”

Her eyes had filled with tears. “I have had trouble, too.”

“I know. They told me about your trouble, and I was sorry for you, little cousin Elizabeth. I hope you will let me help you. Won’t you sit here beside me, Elizabeth?”

She looked shyly at him. “I’ll play for you, if you like,” she said.

“Ye-es—yes, do.”

“Now this is ‘The Elves’ Concourse.’ Listen! You can hear their little feet pattering on the grass. Everybody says it is very sweet and pretty.” Her fingers worked methodically at the strings.

Henry thought her hands lovely as they flew about. Watching her hands, he forgot the music. They were like little white moths, delicate and restless. One would hesitate to touch them for fear of ruining them, and yet one wanted to stroke them. The piece concluded with a flourish of loud bass notes. Now it was finished. When the last string had ceased its vibration, he observed:

“You play very—precisely, Elizabeth.”

“Oh, I play the notes as they come,” she said. “I always think the composer knew his business better than I do.”

“I know, and it is a comfort to hear you. It is reassuring to know that everything is in its place—even notes. You have stripped away a certain obnoxious freedom I’ve noticed in the playing of other young women. That style is lovable, spontaneous, and human, of course, but prone to carelessness in the interest of passion. Yes, as I become older, I grow to take satisfaction in seeing the expected come to pass. Uncertainty is distracting. Chance no longer has the pull on me it once had. I was a fool, Elizabeth. I went sailing and sailing looking for something—well, something that did not exist, perhaps. And now that I have lost my unnamable desires, I may not be happier, but there is more contentment in me.”

“That sounds wise and worldly, and a little bit cynical,” she observed.

“But if it is wisdom, then wisdom is experience rattling about an orderly brain, kicking over the files. And how could I be anything but worldly? As for cynicism, it is simply the moss that collects on a rolling stone.”

“Well, it is clever, anyway,” she agreed. “I suppose you have known a great many of those young women you spoke of.”

“What young women, Elizabeth?”

“The ones who played badly.”

“Oh! Yes, I have met a few.”

“And did you—did you—like them?”

“I tolerated them because they were friends of friends.”

“Did any of them fall in love with you? I know I am not delicate, but you are my cousin, and almost my—my brother.”

“Oh, some said they did—but I suspect they wanted my money.”

“Surely not! But I shall play for you again. This one is a sad piece—‘God Bears the Weary Soul to Rest.’ I always think it is better to balance the lighter music with a little seriousness.”

“Yes,” he said. “Yes; so it is.”

Again her fingers worked over the strings.

“It is very beautiful, and sad,” said Henry, when it was finished. “I liked it immensely, but don’t you think, Elizabeth—don’t you think that sixth string from the end might be a little—tighter?”

“Oh, I wouldn’t have it touched for the world!” she cried. “Before we sailed from England, Papa had a man—a harp master—go over the whole instrument thoroughly. I wouldn’t feel just right with Papa if it were tampered with. He hated people who fiddled with things.”

They sat in silence after her outburst, but at length she looked pleadingly into his eyes. “You aren’t angry with me about the string, are you, Cousin Henry? I just have deep feelings like that. I can’t help it.”

“No, of course I am not angry.” She was so little and so helpless, he thought.

“Where will you be going, now that you are rich and famous and covered with honors?”

“I don’t know. I want to live surrounded by sure things.”

“Why, that’s just the way I think,” she exclaimed. “We must be somewhat alike. Things come to you if you don't go looking for them, I always say. And nearly always I know what is going to happen to me, because I hope for it and then sit still.”

“Yes,” said Henry.

“Papa’s death was a great shock,” she said, and again the tears were in her eyes. “It’s a terrible thing to be left alone with almost no—no relatives or friends. Of course, the Moddyfords have been lovely to me, but they couldn’t be like my own people. Oh, dear! I have been so lonely. I was glad when you came, Cousin Henry, if only because we are of one blood.” Her eyes were glistening with tears, and her underlip trembled violently.

“But you must not cry,” Henry said soothingly. “You won't need to worry anymore, Elizabeth. I am here to lift this burden from your shoulders. I will help you and care for you, Elizabeth. I wonder how you bore the grief that fell on you. You have been brave to hold your head so high when misery was tugging at your spirit.”

“I had my music,” she said. “I could retire into my music when the grief was too bitter.”

“But now, Elizabeth, you need not even do that. You will come with me to England when I go, and you will be comfortable and safe with me for always.”

She sprang away from him.

“But what are you suggesting? What is this thing you are proposing to me?” she cried. “Isn’t it some sin—some crime—for cousins to marry?”

“Marry?”

“Oh!” She blushed, and her eyes glittered again with her quick tears. “Oh! I am ashamed. You did mean marry, didn’t you? I am ashamed.” Her agitation was entirely pitiful.

“After all, why not?” thought Henry. “She is pretty; I know her family; and besides, she is rather a symbol of this security I have been preaching. With her as my wife, I could be sure of never doing anything too radical. I really think I do want security. And besides,” he concluded, “I really cannot let her suffer so.”

“Oh, surely I meant marry. What else could you have thought I meant? I am just clumsy and crude in my asking. I have startled you and hurt you. But, dear Elizabeth, there is no crime or sin about it. Many cousins marry. And we know all about each other, and our family is one. You must marry me, Elizabeth. Truly I love you, Elizabeth.”

“Oh!” she stammered. “O-oh! I cannot think of it. I mean, I am—ill; I mean—my head whirls. You speak so suddenly, Henry—so unexpectedly. Oh, please let me go. I must talk about it to Lady Moddyford. She will know what to say.”

### II

King Charles the Second and John Evelyn sat in a tiny library. A fire crackled on the hearth, casting its flicker against the books that lined the walls. Beside the two men, a small table held bottles and glasses.

“I knighted him this afternoon,” the King was saying. “Pardon and a knighthood for two thousand pounds.”

“Well, two thousand pounds—” John Evelyn murmured. “Certain tradesmen will, perhaps, bless his knighthood.”

“But that’s not the point, John. I could have had twenty. He took a million out of Panama.”

“Ah, well. Two thousand pounds—”

“I ordered him to attend us tonight,” the King said. “These sailors and pirates sometimes have a tale or two worth repeating. But you’ll be disappointed in the man himself. He is—lumpish, I think, is the word. You get the impression of a great mass planted before you; he moves as though pushing his own invisible cage ahead of him.”

“You might create a new title,” John Evelyn suggested. “It seems wasteful to let a million slip away without an effort.”

Sir Henry Morgan was announced.

“Step in, sir. Step in!” The King saw that Henry was already clutching a glass of wine. He seemed frightened. He gulped it down.

“Good job of yours in Panama,” the King observed. “Better to burn it now than later—and I have no doubt we should have had to do it eventually.”

“I thought of that when I set the torch, Sire. These hoggish Spaniards mean to overrun the world.”

“You know, Captain, piracy—or, to be delicate, free-booting—has been a good thing for us, and a bad thing for Spain. But the institution has grown to be a nuisance. I spend half my time making excuses to the Spanish Ambassador. I am going to commission you Lieutenant-Governor of Jamaica.”

“Sire!”

“No thanks are necessary! I am acting on the advice of an adage. Piracy must be stopped now. These men have played at little wars long enough.”

“But, Sire, I myself was a buccaneer. Would you have me hang my own men?”

“That is what I implied, sir. Who can track them down better than you, who know all their haunts?”

“They fought beside me, Sire.”

“Ah, conscience? I had heard you were able to do about as you pleased with your conscience.”

“Not conscience, Sire. Pity.”

“Pity is misplaced in a public servant or a robber. A man may do what it is profitable to do. You yourself have demonstrated two of those premises. Let us see you labor with the third,” the King said acidly.

“I wonder if I can.”

“If you wonder, then you can,” John Evelyn put in.

The King’s manner shifted.

“Come! Drink!” he said. “We must have life, and perhaps later, song. Tell us a tale, Captain, and drink while you tell it. Wine adds capitals and asterisks to a good tale—especially a true one.”

“A tale, Sire?”

“Surely. Some story of the colonial wenches; some little interlude in piracy—for I am sure you did not steal only gold.” He motioned for a servant to keep Henry’s glass filled. “I have heard of a certain woman in Panama. Tell us about her.”

Henry drained his glass, his face flushing. “There is a tale about her,” he said. “She was pretty, but she was also an heiress. I confess, I favored her. She stood to inherit silver mines. Her husband offered one hundred thousand pieces of eight for her return—he wanted to get his hands on those mines. Here was the question, Sire, and I wonder how many men have been confronted with one like it: should I take the woman, or the hundred thousand?”

The King leaned forward in his chair. “Which did you take? Tell me, quickly.”

“I remained in Panama for a while,” Henry said. “What would Your Majesty have done in my place? I took both. Perhaps I got even more than that. Who knows but my son will inherit those silver mines eventually.”

“I would have done just that!” cried the King. “You are right. I would have done exactly that. Clever, sir. A toast, Captain—to foresight. Your generalship runs to matters other than warfare, I see. They say you have never been defeated in battle; but tell me, Captain, were you ever defeated in love? It makes a good scene—an unusual scene—when a man admits himself bested in love. The admission runs so utterly contrary to every masculine instinct. Another glass, sir, and tell us of your defeat.”

“Not by a woman, Sire. But once, I was defeated by Death. There are things that so sear the soul that their pain follows a man all through life. You asked for the story. Your health, Sire.

“I was born in Wales, among the mountains. My father was a gentleman. One summer, when I was but a lad, a little princess of France came to our mountains for the air. She had a small retinue, but being lively and restless and clever, she managed some freedom. One morning I came upon her where she bathed alone in the river. She was naked and unashamed. In an hour—such is the passionate blood of her race—she was lying in my arms. Sire, in all my wanderings, in all the lovely women I have seen and the towns I have taken, there has been no pleasure like the days of that joyous summer. Whenever she could escape, we played together in the hills like little gods. But it was not enough. We wanted to be married. She would give up her rank, and we would go to live somewhere in America.

“Then the autumn came. One day she told me, ‘They are ready to take me away, but I will not go.’ The next day she did not come. In the night I crept to her window, and she tossed down a little note: ‘I am imprisoned. They have whipped me.’

“I went home. What else could I do? I could not fight the stout soldiers who guarded her. Very late that night, there came a pounding on our door, and frantic cries: ‘Where is a doctor to be had? Quick! The little princess has poisoned herself.’”

Henry lifted his eyes. The King was smiling ironically. John Evelyn drummed his fingers on the table.

“Yes?” said the King. “Yes?” He chuckled.

“Ah, I am old—old,” Henry moaned. “It is a lie. She was a peasant child. The daughter of a cottager.”

He staggered to his feet and moved toward the door, shame burning in his face.

“Captain Morgan, you forget yourself.”

“I—forget—myself?”

“There are certain little courtesies. Custom demands that you render them to our person.”

“I beg pardon, Sire. I plead your permission to leave. I—I am ill.” He bowed himself from the room.

The King smiled through his wine.

“How is it, John, that such a great soldier can be such a great fool?”

“How could it be otherwise?” John Evelyn said. “If great men were not fools, the world would have been destroyed long ago. How could it be otherwise? Folly and distorted vision are the very foundations of greatness.”

“You mean my vision is distorted?”

“No, I do not mean that.”

“Then you imply—”

“I wish to speak of Henry Morgan. He has a knack for piracy that makes him great, and immediately you imagine him a great ruler. You make him Lieutenant-Governor. In this, you are like the multitude. You believe that if a man do one thing magnificently, he should be able to do all things equally well. If a man be eminently successful in creating an endless line of mechanical doodads of some excellence, you conceive him capable of leading armies or maintaining governments. You think that because you are a good king, you should be as good a lover—or vice versa.”

“Vice versa?”

“A humorous alternative, Sire. A conversational trick to gain a smile—nothing more.”

“I see. But Morgan and his folly—”

“Of course he is a fool, Sire, else he would be turning soil in Wales or burrowing in the mines. He wanted something, and was idiot enough to think he could get it. And because of his idiocy, he did get it—or at least, part of it. You remember the princess.”

The King was smiling again.

“I have never known a man to tell the truth to or about a woman. Why is that, John?”

“Perhaps, Sire, if you would explain the tiny scratch I see under your right eye, you could understand. That scratch was not there last night, and it has the distinct look of—”

“Yes, yes—a clumsy servant. Let us speak of Morgan. You have a way, John, of being secretly insulting. Sometimes you are not even conscious of your insults. It is a habit you must put down if you are to be around courts for any length of time.”

### III

Sir Henry Morgan sat on the Judge’s Bench at Port Royal. Before him, across the floor, lay a blinding slab of white sunlight. Throughout the room, an orchestra of flies sang a symphony of boredom. The droning voices of the counsel were merely louder instruments against this humming obbligato. Court officials moved about sleepily, and the cases dragged on.

“It was the fifteenth of the month, my lord. Williamson went to the Cartwright property for the purpose of determining—determining to his own satisfaction, my lord, whether the tree stood as described. It was while he was there—”

The case wound down to its monotonous conclusion. Sir Henry shifted sleepily behind his broad table. Next, the guards brought in a sullen vagrant clothed in the rags of an old sail.

“Charged with stealing four biscuits and a mirror from So-and-So, my lord.”

“The proof?”

“He was detected, my lord.”

“Did you, or did you not, steal four biscuits and a mirror?”

The prisoner’s face became even more sullen.

“I told ’em.”

“My lord,” the guard prompted.

“My lord.”

“Why did you steal these articles?”

“I wan’ed ’em.”

“Say, ‘my lord.’”

“My lord.”

“What did you want with them?”

“I wan’ed the biscuits for to eat.”

“My lord.”

“My lord.”

“And the mirror?”

“I wan’ed the mirror for to look at myself in.”

“My lord.”

“My lord.”

They led the man away to his imprisonment. Next, the guards brought in a thin, pasty woman.

“Charged with harlotry and incontinence, my lord.”

“Incontinence is illegal,” Sir Henry said with irritation, “but since when have we been punishing people for harlotry?”

“My lord, the nature of this woman—The public health demands—We thought the case would be understood.”

“Ah! I see. She must be locked up. Take her away quickly.”

The woman began to cry sulkily.

Sir Henry rested his forehead against his hands. He did not bother to look up at the next prisoners.

“Charged with piracy on the high seas, my lord; with disturbing the King’s peace; with an act of war against a friendly nation.”

Sir Henry glanced up quickly at the prisoners. One was a rotund little man with eyes full of terror; the other was a lean, grizzled fellow missing an arm.

“What is the proof against the prisoners?”

“Five witnesses, my lord.”

“So? Make your plea!”

The tall man placed his good arm about the shoulders of his companion.

“We plead guilty, my lord.”

“You plead guilty?” Sir Henry cried in amazement. “But no pirate ever pleads guilty. This is unprecedented.”

“We plead guilty, my lord.”

“But why?”

“Fifty people saw us in action, my lord. Why should we take up your time in denying what fifty people will swear to? No, we are resigned, my lord. We are content, both with the recent action and with our lives.” The wiry arm gave a reassuring squeeze to the small, round tub of a buccaneer.

Sir Henry sat in deep silence for a time. Finally, he raised his tired eyes. “I sentence you to be hanged.”

“Hanged, my lord?”

“Hanged by the neck until you are dead.”

“You are changed, sir.”

Sir Henry leaned forward and scrutinized the prisoners closely. A faint smile touched his lips. “Yes,” he said quietly, “I am changed. The Henry Morgan you knew is not the Sir Henry Morgan who sentences you to death. I do not kill ferociously anymore, but coldly, and because I have to.” Sir Henry raised his voice. “Let the court be cleared, but guard the doors! I wish to speak privately with the prisoners.”

When they were alone he began:

“I know well that I am changed, but tell me what is the change you see.”

The Burgundians looked at each other. “You speak, Emil.”

“You are changed, sir, in this way. Once you knew what you were doing. You were sure of yourself.”

“That is so,” the other broke in. “You do not know—you are not sure of yourself anymore. Once you were one man. It is possible to trust one man. But now you are several men. If we should trust one of you, we should be in fear of the others.”

Sir Henry laughed. “That is more or less true. It is not my fault, but it is true. Civilization will split up a character, and he who refuses to split goes under.”

“We have forgotten about civilization, thanks to our Mother,” Antoine muttered fiercely.

“What a pity to hang you.”

“But is it so necessary to hang us, sir? Could we not escape or be pardoned?”

“No, you must be hanged. I am sorry, but it must be so. Such is my duty.”

“But duty to your friends, sir—to the men who bore arms with you, who mixed their blood with yours—”

“Listen, Other Burgundian; there are two kinds of duty, and you would know that if you remembered your France. You mentioned one species, which is the weaker kind. The other, the giant duty—that which will not be overlooked—might be called the duty of appearances. I do not hang you because you are pirates, but because I am expected to hang pirates. I am sorry for you. I would like to send you to your cells with saws in your pockets, but I cannot. As long as I do what is expected of me, I shall remain the Judge. When I change, for whatever motive, I may myself be hanged.”

“That is so, sir. I remember.” He turned to his friend, who stood shaking in the grip of horror. “You see, such is the case, Emil. He does not like to tell us this thing because it hurts him. Perhaps he punishes himself in this manner for something he has done or failed to do. Perhaps he remembers Chagres, Emil.”

“Chagres!” Sir Henry bent forward with excitement. “What happened after I sailed away? Tell me!”

“You were cursed, sir, as it is given to few men to be cursed. You were tortured in men’s minds. They feasted on your heart and sent your soul to hell. I enjoyed the scene rarely, because I knew that every man there envied you while he reviled you. I was proud of you, sir.”

“And they scattered?”

“They scattered and died, poor little children.”

“Anyway, I should have hated to fall in with those poor little children! Tell me,” Sir Henry’s voice became wistful, “tell me about Panama. We did go there, didn’t we? We really captured Panama, didn’t we, and looted it? It was I who led you, wasn’t it?”

“It was so. It was a grand fight and an ocean of plunder—but, after all, you know more about that last part than we do.”

“Sometimes I doubt whether this body ever went to Panama. I am sure this brain did not. I would like to stay and talk to you of that old time, but my wife expects me. She is apt to fuss if I am late for luncheon.” He spoke with a grim, forced lightness. “When would you like to be hanged?”

The Burgundians were whispering together.

“Ah, there is that ‘hanged’ again. When would we like to be hanged? Any time, sir. We do not wish to put you to the trouble, but if you insist—any time there is a man and a rope idle.” Antoine approached the table. “Emil wishes to offer one last compliment. It is a gift for your wife—a gift whose history alone makes it valuable. Emil has treasured this gift to the end, and from this talisman he has reaped quite a harvest—for talismanic it is, in truth, sir. But Emil thinks its period of duty should end. He believes that by parting with it, he can halt the series of events that have flowed from this treasure. And Emil, unfortunately, will have no further use for it. Emil kisses the hand of Lady Morgan—presents his respects and dignified compliments.” He dropped a rose pearl on the table and turned quickly away.

After they had been led out, Sir Henry sat at his bench and stared at the pearl. Then he put it in his pocket and walked out into the street.

He came to the squat, white Palace of the Lieutenant-Governor. It was exactly as Sir Edward had left it. Lady Morgan would not have felt right if a single detail had been changed. She met Henry at the door.

“We are to have dinner with the Vaughns. And what am I to do about the coachman? He’s drunk. I’ve told you and told you to lock your closet, but you will not pay attention to me. He sneaked into the house and got a bottle off your shelf. He must have done.”

“Open your hand, my dear. I have a gift for you.”

He dropped the rose pearl into her palm.

For a moment, she looked at the rosy sphere, her face flushing with pleasure. But then she searched his expression suspiciously.

“What have you been up to?”

“Up to? Why, I have been holding court.”

“I suppose you got this in court!” Her face lit up. “I know! You suspected my displeasure at your actions last night. You were practically intoxicated, if you must know the truth; and all the people were staring at you and whispering. Don’t say a word. I saw them and I saw you. And now you want to bribe my feeling—my decency.”

“Suspected your displeasure! My dear, I suspected it all the way home with you, and nearly all night after we got here. You are right. I strongly suspected your displeasure. In fact, I was certain of it. But I will tell you the truth about the pearl.”

“You will tell the truth only because you know you cannot deceive me, Henry. When will you give up the idea that I don’t know every little thought you possess?”

“But I didn’t try to deceive you. You didn’t give me time.”

“It takes no more time to tell the truth than—”

“Listen to me, Elizabeth, please. I tried two pirates this morning and they gave it to me.”

She offered a superior smile. “They gave it to you? Why? Did you release them? It would be like you to release them. Sometimes I think you would still be one of them if it weren’t for me. You never seem to realize, Henry, that it is really I who have made you what you are—a knight and a gentleman. You made yourself a buccaneer. But tell me, did you release these pirates?”

“No; I sentenced them to death.”

“Ah! Then why did they give you the pearl?”

“My dear, they gave it to me because they had nothing else to do with it. They might have presented it to the hangman, but one might feel a trifle diffident about giving pearls to the man putting a rope around one’s neck. Friendship isn’t possible with one’s hangman, I should imagine. Thus, they gave it to me, and I—” he smiled broadly and innocently, “I am giving it to you because I love you.”

“Well, I can easily find out about the pirates, and as to your affection—you love me as long as I have my eye on you, and no longer. I know you thoroughly. But I am glad they are to be hanged. Lord Vaughn says they are a positive danger even to ourselves. He says they may stop fighting Spain at any moment and start on us. He says they are like vicious dogs, to be exterminated as soon as possible. I feel a little safer every time one of them is out of the way.”

“But, my dear, Lord Vaughn knows nothing about buccaneers, while I—”

“Henry, why do you keep me here with your talking, when you know I have a thousand things to attend to? You think, because you have all the time in the world, that I can afford to help you idle. Now, do see to the coachman, because I should be terribly embarrassed if he were not fit. His livery will not fit Jacob, not by any amount of pinching. Did I tell you he is drunk? Get him sober for tonight if you must drown him to do it. Now hurry along. I won’t feel right until I know he can sit up straight.” She turned to reenter the house, then came back and kissed him on the cheek.

“It’s really a nice pearl. Thank you, dear,” she said. “Of course, I am going to have Monsieur Banzet value it. After what Lord Vaughn said, I have very little faith in pirates. They might have been trying to bribe you with paste, and you would never know the difference.”

Sir Henry walked toward the stables. Now, as on other occasions, he was gently stirred by uneasiness. Now and then came the vagrant feeling that, despite all of Elizabeth’s grand declarations about knowing him so thoroughly—perhaps she really did. It was a disquieting thought.

### IV

Sir Henry Morgan lay in an enormous bed, one so wide that his body, under the coverlid, seemed a snow-covered mountain range dividing two great plains. From the surrounding walls, the shiny eyes of his ancestors regarded him. On their faces were smirks which said, “Ah, yes! A knight, to be sure—but we know how you bought your knighthood.” The air in the room was heavy, thick, and hot. So the air always seems in a room where a man is about to die.

Sir Henry stared at the ceiling. For an hour he had been puzzled by its mysterious expanse. Nothing supported it in the middle. Why did it not fall? It was late. Everyone around him was silent; they went sneaking about pretending to be ghosts, he thought. They were trying to convince him that he was already dead. He closed his eyes, too tired or indifferent to keep them open. He heard the doctor come in and felt him reading his pulse. Then a big, confident voice boomed:

“I am sorry, Lady Morgan. There is nothing left to do now. I do not even know what is the matter with him. Some old jungle fever, perhaps. I could bleed him again, I suppose, but we have taken a great deal of blood already, and it seems to do no good. However, if he begins to sink, I shall try it again.”

“Then he will die?” Lady Morgan asked. Henry thought she showed more curiosity than sorrow.

“Yes, he will die unless God intervenes. Only God can be sure of his patients.”

The room was then cleared of people. Henry knew his wife was sitting near the bed; he could hear her crying softly beside him. “What a pity it is,” he thought, “that I cannot go to my death in a ship, so she might pack my bag for me. It would give her so much satisfaction to know I was entering heaven with a decent supply of clean linen.”

“Oh, my husband—Oh, Henry, my husband.”

He turned his head and looked at her curiously, his gaze reaching deep into her eyes. Suddenly, he was seized with despair.

“This woman loves me,” he said to himself. “This woman loves me, and I have never known it. I cannot know this kind of love. Her eyes—her eyes—this is something far beyond my comprehension. Can she have loved me always?” He looked again. “She is very near to God. I think women are nearer to God than men. They cannot talk about it, but, Christ! how it shines in their eyes. And she loves me. During all her hectoring, badgering, and browbeating, she has loved me—and I have never known it. But what would I have done if I had known it?” He turned away. This sorrow was too great, too burning and awful to regard. It is terrifying to see a woman’s soul shining through her eyes.

So he was to die. It was rather pleasant, if death was like this. He was warm and very tired. Presently he would fall asleep, and that would be death—Brother Death.

He sensed another person had come into the room. His wife leaned over until she crossed his upward-staring vision. She would be annoyed if she knew he could turn his head whenever he wished.

“The Vicar, dear,” his wife said. “Do be nice to him. Oh, do listen to him! It may help you—afterwards.” Ah, she was practical! She was going to see that some compact was made with the Almighty, if she could. Her affection was an efficient thing, but her love—that which glittered in her wet eyes—was frightful.

Henry felt a warm, soft hand take his. A soothing voice was talking to him, but it was difficult to listen. The ceiling was swaying dangerously.

“God is Love,” the voice was saying. “You must put your faith in God.”

“God is Love,” Henry repeated mechanically.

“Let us pray,” said the voice.

Suddenly, Henry remembered a moment from his childhood. He was being tortured by an earache, and his mother was holding him in her arms. She stroked his wrist with her fingertips. “This is all nonsense,” she was saying. He remembered how she said it. “This is all nonsense. God is Love. He will not let little boys suffer. Now, repeat after me—‘The Lord is my shepherd. I shall not want.’” It was as though she were administering a medicine. In the exact same tone, she would have commanded, “Come, take this oil!”

Henry felt the Vicar's warm fingers creep to his wrist and begin a stroking movement.

“‘The Lord is my shepherd. I shall not want,’” Henry droned sleepily. “‘He maketh me to lie down in green pastures—’” The stroking continued, but more harshly. The Vicar’s voice became louder and more authoritative. It was as though, after years of patient waiting, the Church had at last caught Henry Morgan within its power. There was something almost gloating in the voice.

“Have you repented your sins, Sir Henry?”

“My sins? No, I had not thought of them. Shall I repent Panama?”

The Vicar was embarrassed. “Well, Panama was a patriotic conquest. The King approved. Besides, the people were Papists.”

“But what are my sins, then?” Henry went on. “I remember only the most pleasant and the most painful among them. Somehow, I do not wish to repent the pleasant ones. It would be like breaking faith with them; they were charming. And the painful sins carried atonement within them, like concealed knives. How may I repent, sir? I might go over my whole life, naming and repenting every act from the shattering of my first teething ring to my last visit to a brothel. I might repent everything I could remember, but if I forgot a single sin, the whole process would be wasted.”

“Have you repented your sins, Sir Henry?”

He realized, then, that he had not been talking at all. It was difficult to speak. His tongue had become lazy and sluggish. “No,” he said. “I can’t remember them very well.”

“You must search your heart for greed, lust, and spite. You must drive wickedness from your heart.”

“But, sir, I don’t remember ever having been consciously wicked. I have done things which seemed wicked afterward, but while I was doing them, I always had some rather good end in view.” Again, he was conscious that he wasn’t really speaking.

“Let us pray,” the voice said.

Henry forced a violent effort from his heavy tongue. “No!” he cried.

“But you prayed before.”

“Yes, I prayed before—because my mother would have liked it. She would have wanted me to pray at least once, more as proof of her training than for any other reason—a reassurance to her that she had done her duty by me.”

“Would you die a heretic, Sir Henry? Aren’t you afraid of death?”

“I am too tired, sir, or too lazy, to consider problems of heresy. And I am not afraid of death. I have seen much violence, and no man whom I have admired was ever afraid of death, but only of dying. You see, sir, death is an intellectual matter, but dying is pure pain. And this death of mine is very pleasant so far. No, sir; I am not afraid even of dying. It is comfortable, and it would be quiet if I could only be left alone. It is as though I were about to fall asleep after a great effort.”

He heard the Vicar’s voice again, but though the warm hand still stroked his wrist, the words now came from a mighty distance.

“He will not answer me,” the Vicar was saying. “I am perplexed for his soul.”

Then he heard his wife speaking to him. “You must pray, dear. Everyone does. How can you get to heaven if you do not pray?”

There she was again, intent on making a contract with God. But Henry did not want to look at her. Naive though her philosophy was, her eyes were as deep and sad as the limitless sky. He wanted to say, “I shan't want to get to heaven once I am dead. I shan't want anyone to disturb me.” They were making such a commotion over this death.

The doctor had returned to the room. “He is unconscious,” the booming voice proclaimed. “I think I will bleed him again.”

Henry felt the scalpel bite into his arm. It was pleasant. He hoped they would cut him again and again. But the sensation was contradictory. Rather than feeling the blood drain from him, he sensed a curious warmth slipping through his body. His breast and arms tingled, as though some robust, ancient wine were singing in his veins.

Now a queer change began to take place. He found that he could see through his eyelids; he could see all around him without moving his head. The doctor, his wife, the Vicar, and even the room itself were sliding away from him.

“They are moving,” he thought. “I am not moving. I am fixed. I am the center of all things and cannot move. I am as heavy as the universe. Perhaps I am the universe.”

A low, sweet tone flowed into his consciousness—a vibrant, rich organ tone that filled him. It seemed to emanate from his brain, flood his body, and then surge out over the world. He noticed with mild surprise that the room was gone. He was lying in an immeasurable, dark grotto, lined with rows of thick, squat columns made of a glittering green crystal. He was still reclining, and the long grotto was sliding past him. All of a sudden, the movement stopped. He was surrounded by strange beings with the bodies of children and heavy, bulbous heads, but no faces. The flesh where their faces should have been was solid and unbroken. These beings were chattering in dry, raucous voices. Henry was puzzled that they could talk without mouths.

Slowly, the knowledge grew in him that these were his deeds and his thoughts, which now lived with Brother Death. Each one had departed to live with Brother Death the very moment it was born. Once he recognized their identity, the faceless little creatures turned on him, clustering thickly about his couch.

“Why did you do me?” one cried.

“I do not know; I do not remember you.”

“Why did you think me?”

“I do not know. I must have known, but I have forgotten. My memory is slipping away from me here in this grotto.”

Still they questioned him, insistently, their voices growing so strident and harsh that they began to overwhelm the great Tone.

“Me! Answer me!”

“No; me!”

“Oh, leave me! Let me rest,” Henry said wearily. “I am tired, and I cannot tell you anything, anyway.”

Then he saw the little beings crouch before an approaching form. They turned toward it and cowered, at length falling to their knees and raising trembling arms in gestures of supplication.

Henry strained his attention toward the figure. Why, it was Elizabeth coming toward him—little Elizabeth, with her golden hair and that wise, young look on her face. She wore a girdle of cornflowers, and her eyes were strangely puzzled and bright. With a little start of surprise, she noticed Henry.

“I am Elizabeth,” she said. “You did not come to see me before you went away.”

“I know. I think I was afraid to talk with you. But I stood in the darkness before your window, and I whistled.”

“Did you?” She smiled gladly. “That was nice of you. I cannot see, though, why you should have been afraid of me—of such a little girl. It was silly of you.”

“I do not know why,” he said. “I ran away. I was driven by a power that is now slipping out of all the worlds. My memories are leaving me one by one, like a colony of aged swans flying off to some lonely island in the sea to die. But you became a princess, did you not?” he asked anxiously.

“Yes, perhaps I did. I hope I did. I, too, forget. Tell me, did you really stand there in the dark?”

Henry had noticed a peculiar thing. If he looked steadily at one of the crouching, faceless beings, it disappeared. He amused himself by staring first at one, then at another, until they were all gone.

“Did you really stand there in the dark?”

“I do not know. Perhaps I only thought I did.” He looked for Elizabeth, but she, too, had disappeared. In her place sat a red, smoldering ember, the light rapidly dying out of it.

“Wait, Elizabeth—Wait. Tell me where my father is. I want to see my father.”

The dying ember answered him.

“Your father is happily dead. He was afraid to test even death.”

“But Merlin, then—where is Merlin? If I could only find him.”

“Merlin? You should know of him. Merlin is herding dreams in Avalon.”

The fire went out of the ember with a dry, hard snap. There was no light anywhere. For a lingering moment, Henry remained conscious of the deep, mellow pulsation of the Tone.
